World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Settlement and Artificial Mummification of ...
Settlement and Artificial Mummification of the Chinchorro Culture in the Arica and Parinacota Region
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Settlement and Artificial Mummification of the Chinchorro Culture in the Arica and Parinacota Region

The property consists of three component parts: Faldeo Norte del Morro de Arica, Colón 10, both in the city of Arica, and Desembocadura de Camarones, in a rural environment some 100km further south. Together they bear testimony to a culture of marine hunter-gatherers who resided in the arid and hostile northern coast of the Atacama Desert in northernmost Chile from approximately 5450 BCE to 890 BCE. The property presents the oldest known archaeological evidence of the artificial mummification of bodies with cemeteries that contain both artificially mummified bodies and some that were preserved due to environmental conditions. Over time, the Chinchorro perfected complex mortuary practices, whereby they systematically dismembered and reassembled bodies of deceased men, women and children of the entire social spectrum to create “artificial” mummies. These mummies possess material, sculptural, and aesthetic qualities that are presumed to reflect the fundamental role of the dead in Chinchorro society. Tools made of mineral and plant materials as well as simple instruments made of bone and shells that enabled an intensive exploitation of marine resources, have been found in the property which bears a unique testimony to the complex spirituality of the Chinchorro culture.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The northern coast of the Atacama Desert, an arid and hostile habitat in northernmost Chile, was home to the Chinchorro, a society of marine hunter-gatherers who lived here from approximately 7400 BP to 2840 BP (5450 BCE to 890 BCE). They successfully adapted to the extreme environmental conditions of a hyper-arid coastal desert in the rugged Coastal Cordillera by using the nearby rich marine resources. Archaeological sites associated with the Chinchorro culture are recognized for having the oldest known artificially mummified human bodies.

The serial property is comprised of three component parts – Faldeo Norte del Morro de Arica and Colón 10 (both located in an urban setting), and Desembocadura de Camarones (located in a rural environment) – which include the archaeological remains of settlements, cemeteries, and dense shell middens, as well as a natural setting similar to that faced by the Chinchorro people. These remains provide evidence of sea harvesting activities and land occupation that illustrate the technological and spiritual complexity of this society from its coastal beginnings to its disappearance.

The cemeteries reveal that the Chinchorro innovated continuously in their mummification practices to create artificial mummies that possessed extraordinary material, sculptural, and aesthetic qualities that reflected the fundamental social role of the dead in human society.

Criterion (iii): The cultural remains left behind by the Chinchorro people, including their artefacts, mummies, and cemeteries, stand as a testimony to their belief system and ideas about the afterlife, and as such bear a unique testimony to this cultural tradition. The Chinchorro cemeteries reveal artificially as well as naturally mummified bodies, both in exceptionally good states of conservation due to the very dry environment. The Chinchorro innovated continuously in their artificial mummification practices, revealing technical ability by dismembering and reassembling bodies to create artificial mummies possessing extraordinary material, sculptural, and aesthetic qualities.

Criterion (v): The Chinchorro culture occupied one of the most arid places in the world, the coastal areas of the Atacama Desert. The property presents an outstanding example of human interaction with the environment, with highly specialized use of land and sea resources. The marine hunter-gatherer groups adapted to a harsh environment that had minimal fresh water and plant resources and developed simple and efficient technologies to harvest from the ocean. Culturally, they flourished for thousands of years in a vast, hyper-dry territory and the archaeological evidence of their sea harvesting and land occupation can be found in settlements, cemeteries, and shell middens as well as in the environmental setting itself.

Integrity

The integrity of the property is based on the cultural remains left behind by the Chinchorro people, particularly artificially mummified remains, and on this people’s adaptation to one of the most arid places in the world, where they flourished for thousands of years. The serial component parts were selected as the most representative and best preserved of all the Chinchorro sites in northern Chile and southern Peru, for their complementary nature, and for their tangible attributes that provide a comprehensive view of the Chinchorro culture. Issues with site encroachment in the Faldeo Norte del Morro de Arica component part have been resolved, and are in the process of being addressed at the Desembocadura de Camarones component. Part of the Faldeo Norte del Morro de Arica component has been affected by public works. Further explanation on distribution and interrelationships of the archaeological sites located within the property component parts, including the remains already removed through excavation, as well as those still in situ and detected through different surveying techniques, would enhance the integrity of the property.

Authenticity

The conditions of authenticity of the Settlement and Artificial Mummification of the Chinchorro Culture in terms of the attributes of material, design and substance have been met. The knowledge of the Chinchorro culture comes from studies of archaeological sites endorsed by a number of national and international scientific conferences and publications. Archaeological sites where no reconstructions have been undertaken retain a high degree of authenticity. It is supposed that most of the property’s archaeological artefacts remain in situ, unexcavated and untouched for thousands of years and therefore are authentic.

Protection and management requirements

At the national level, the Ministry of Culture, the Arts and Heritage is officially in charge of Chile’s cultural heritage. The Undersecretariat of Cultural Heritage is responsible for developing cultural policies, including those associated with World Heritage properties. The National Monuments Council, which is part of the Ministry of Culture, the Arts and Heritage, is the technical body in charge of supervising and maintaining National Monuments, which is the legal category protecting the Chinchorro archaeological sites. Any changes to the sites must be authorized by this council. The National Cultural Heritage Service acts as technical advisor to World Heritage properties in Chilean territory through the National Centre for World Heritage Sites, which supports the work of site administrators. At the local level, the Chinchorro Marka Corporation is the body in charge of the property’s management system. The current and proposed legal protection of the serial property is based at the national level on Law No. 17288 of National Monuments (1970, substantially modified in 2005 and currently under additional review). At the regional level, Decree No. 4867 (1967) of the Ministry of Education declares all archaeological and palaeontological sites in the Arica and Parinacota Region to be Historical Monuments. The protection established by this Decree covers the archaeological sites in all three component parts of the serial property.

The Desembocadura de Camarones component part and its buffer zone will be protected in the future under the Nature Sanctuary category of Law No. 17288 of National Monuments. The Desembocadura de Camarones component part is protected by Decree No. 240 (2014) of the Ministry of National Defence and the Armed Forces Undersecretariat, which regulates the use of the seashore by non-industrial fishers. Processes related to the nature sanctuary declaration and the renewal of the Regulatory plan of the city of Arica and the Cuya-Caleta Camarones Sectional Plan are still pending and need to be finalized.

The ownership of the three component parts of the property and the two buffer zones is a combination of public and private tenure.

The management system and management plan are comprehensive, well structured, and generally inclusive in terms of stakeholder participation, but they are still under development. The Management Plan of the property (2020-2026) is currently being established. Priority should be given to finalizing, approving and implementing the Management Plan as well as completing and making operational the projected monitoring system.

Systemic documentation and inventorying of the archaeological information already collected needs to be addressed, as well as documentation of areas with potential interest for future investigation. Priority should be given to the development of conservation measures focused on general maintenance and on the identification and rescue of unprotected archaeological remains on the surface. The installation of the basic infrastructure to assure the safety of visitors and the security of the property, the strengthening of general maintenance and the development and application of a Heritage Impact Assessment system are priorities to be tackled. The ethical issues related to the treatment of human remains needs to be addressed. Community outreach activities are key to the success of future management of the property. It will be important to continue these efforts and include in the decision-making processes local stakeholders as well as any community that may have an interest in and connection with the property.

Links
Facebook - Corporación Chinchorro Marka

Programa Plan de Gestión de Sitios Chinchorro

Chinchorro Marka

News  1
Cultural sites in Africa, Arab Region, Asia, Europe, and Latin America inscribed on UNESCO’s World Heritage List
27 July 2021
Chile
Date of Inscription: 2021
Criteria: (iii)(v)
Dossier: 1634
Serial: yes

Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2025 2023
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026