World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Miguasha National Park
Miguasha National Park
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Miguasha National Park

The palaeontological site of Miguasha National Park, in south-eastern Quebec on the southern coast of the Gaspé peninsula, is considered to be the world's most outstanding illustration of the Devonian Period known as the 'Age of Fishes'. Dating from 370 million years ago, the Upper Devonian Escuminac Formation represented here contains five of the six fossil fish groups associated with this period. Its significance stems from the discovery there of the highest number and best-preserved fossil specimens of the lobe-finned fishes that gave rise to the first four-legged, air-breathing terrestrial vertebrates – the tetrapods.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief Synthesis

Located in Canada, on the east coast of Quebec, Miguasha National Park protects and presents the Escuminac Formation, a rock formation with a rich fossil heritage recognized for the large number of exceptionally well-preserved fossil specimens it contains which are representative of the Devonian period. The fish, invertebrate and plant fossils at Miguasha bear witness to life as it existed on Earth 370 million years ago.

Criterion (viii): Miguasha National Park is the most outstanding fossil site in the world from the standpoint of its representation of vertebrate life and its illustration of the Devonian period known as the Age of Fishes. The site is of paramount importance because it has the largest number and the best-preserved fossil specimens in the world of sarcopterygian fish, which gave rise to the first four-legged, air-breathing terrestrial vertebrates—the tetrapods.

Integrity

 Covering an area of 87.3 hectares, the park preserves the integrity of the fossil cliff and the Escuminac Formation. Protection of the beach area strengthens this integrity by permitting the recovery of fossils that fall from the cliff and are moved by the tides. With some 13,000 specimens, the park’s national fossil collection also demonstrates the integrity of this scientific heritage. A large number of these fossils are exceptionally well preserved, with complete specimens, 3D specimens and fossilized soft tissues. The number of preserved specimens and their quality adds to the representativeness of the Devonian period and the uniqueness of the site.

 Protection and management requirements

 Protection of the integrity of this heritage is guaranteed by Miguasha’s conservation park status, established by the Quebec government’s Regulation respecting the establishment of parc national de Miguasha (1985) and by the provincial Parks Act (1978). As a member of the Quebec parks network, Miguasha National Park is the sole owner of the area that it is dedicated to protect and conserve. This legislative and institutional protection ensures the integrity of the site for the benefit of present and future generations.

 In 1990, the provincial mining act decree was issued to prohibit oil, gas and mineral exploration in a 775-hectare peripheral area surrounding the park. In 2004, the province changed the status of this buffer zone to a State Reserve, which means that no development can be undertaken there without the prior authorization of the Quebec Minister of Natural Resources and Wildlife.

 The park has adopted work tools to ensure effective and informed management of Miguasha’s paleontological and environmental heritage. These management tools provide a framework for paleontological research, enforcement of the Parks Act, field operations, excavations, laboratory and collection work, patrols, the park’s education mission and its financial management.

 Over the longer term, special attention will be given to the monitoring of modifications and additions proposed to the property and its surroundings, particularly potential mineral exploration and mining activities; illegal extraction of fossils from the site; climate change; and erosion.

Links
Facebook page

World Heritage in Canada (Parks Canada)

Protectedplanet.net

News  1
World Heritage Committee Inscribes 48 New Sites on Heritage List
2 December 1999
Canada
Date of Inscription: 1999
Criteria: (viii)
Property : 87.3 ha

Buffer zone: 775 ha
Dossier: 686rev
Serial: yes

Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2005
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026