World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Discovery Coast Atlantic Forest Reserves
Discovery Coast Atlantic Forest Reserves
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Discovery Coast Atlantic Forest Reserves

The Discovery Coast Atlantic Forest Reserves, in the states of Bahia and Espírito Santo, consist of eight separate protected areas containing 112,000 ha of Atlantic forest and associated shrub (restingas). The rainforests of Brazil’s Atlantic coast are the world’s richest in terms of biodiversity. The site contains a distinct range of species with a high level of endemism and reveals a pattern of evolution that is not only of great scientific interest but is also of importance for conservation.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief description

The Discovery Coast Atlantic Forest Reserves, located between the southern coast of the state of Bahia and northern coast of the state of Espírito Santo, consist of eight separate protected areas containing representative remnants of the Atlantic Forest  (dense rainforest) and a type of  coastal shrubland vegatation ("restingas") associated with the Atlantic Forest. Three national parks (Descobrimento, Monte Pascoal and Pau Brasil), two federal biological reserves (Sooretama and Una) and three special reserves (Veracruz, Pau Brasil/Ceplac and Linhares) extend over a total area of almost 112,000 hectares. This property contains great biological wealth and illustrates the evolution of the few remaining areas of Atlantic Forest in north-eastern Brazil. With a high rate of endemism and an evolutionary stage of great interest to science and conservation, its biodiversity reflects longstanding ties with the major forest ecosystems of the continent, now interrupted.

Criterion (ix): It is acknowledged that the ongoing processes in the evolution of this exceptionally diverse region are the result of the mix of regional endemic species of the Atlantic Forest with elements of the Amazon ecosystem, particularly observed among the species of plants and birds. In the past, corridors existed between these two major ecosystems.  They were subsequently interrupted, which probably contributed to the great wealth of flora found there with many endemic and rare species, sometimes limited to fragments. The eight protected areas that make up the site preserve barely modified ancient environments and original natural ecological processes -- a forest archipelago that reveals an evolutionary structure of great interest to science and conservation.

Criterion (x): The Discovery Coast Atlantic Forest Reserves represent one of the richest tropical forest regions in the world in terms of biodiversity. It contains around 20% of the world's flora, including 627 species of endangered plants. In some areas more than 450 species of trees over an area equivalent to a football field have been identified. The fauna of the region is represented by 261 species of mammals including 21 marsupials (of which 15% are endemic and 15% threatened), 620 birds (19% at risk), 280 amphibians and 200 reptiles.  In total 185 species (of which 100 endemic) are threatened with extinction, including 73 species of mammals of which 21 are primates. Among the 118 species of endangered birds, 49 are endemic. All 16 species of amphibians that are threatened are endemic. Of the 13 species of reptiles that are threatened, 10 are endemic.

Integrity

The Discovery Coast Atlantic Forest Reserves is comprised of eight protected areas that represent the last remnants of the Atlantic Forest preserved in the region. These fragments of reduced size require intensive management. The six protected areas that make up the site are contiguous with two others located within reasonable proximity and connected by habitat corridors and semi-natural buffer zones. The property is surrounded by a buffer zone consisting essentially of private properties dedicated mainly to pastoral activities and forest plantations. The buffer zone is the Mata Atlântica Biosphere Reserve of nearly a million hectares which provides a comprehensive management framework to central areas of the site. The entire protected area is entirely managed for conservation and research, and provides full protection to the forest.

Protection and management requirements

The organization responsible for the management of most of the natural areas that make up the property is the Chico Mendes Institute for Biodiversity Conservation (ICMBio), an autonomous federal agency under the Ministry of the Environment (three national parks – Descobrimento, Monte Pascoal and Pau Brasil, two federal biological reserves -. Sooretama and Una, and three special reserves (Veracruz, Pau Brasil/Ceplac and Linhares).  Several management authorities are involved in the use of various management and protection instruments within the conservation units that make up the property, including the development and implementation of management plans, training and renewal of the advisory boards; the creation of ecological corridors and the establishment of a mosaic for the integrated management of protected areas. The main challenges for the protection seem to be an obligation to monitor deforestation and burning practices in the buffer zone, to improve cooperation with the Pataxó Indians of the region, to develop a campaign for environmental education, to consider the creation of new protected areas in the region, and to obtain more resources for the implementation of recommendations and management plans.  In this context, the federal government and the States, together with private initiatives, seek to implement the protection of these areas by strengthening the basic infrastructure, and increasing human resources and surveillance activities.
Links
Protectedplanet.net

News  1
World Heritage Committee Inscribes 48 New Sites on Heritage List
2 December 1999
Brazil
Date of Inscription: 1999
Criteria: (ix)(x)
Property : 111,930 ha

Dossier: 892rev
Serial: yes

Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
Protections
by other conservation instruments

2 protections / 2 elements

Biosphere Reserves (1 element)

Mata Atlântica
RAMSAR (1 element)

Environmental Protection Area of Cananéia-Iguape-Peruíbe

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026