World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Sangay National Park
Sangay National Park
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Assistance
Sangay National Park

With its outstanding natural beauty and two active volcanoes, the park illustrates the entire spectrum of ecosystems, ranging from tropical rainforests to glaciers, with striking contrasts between the snowcapped peaks and the forests of the plains. Its isolation has encouraged the survival of indigenous species such as the mountain tapir and the Andean condor.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

With its outstanding natural beauty and two active volcanoes, the Sangay National Park illustrates within its 270,000 hectares the entire spectrum of ecosystems of Ecuador. These include glacial and volcanic ecosystems, cloud forests, Amazon rainforest, wetlands, lakes, and the fragile moorlands (páramos) and grasslands of the highlands. Geologically, this area is especially important due to the presence of the Sangay volcano, which at 5,140m in altitude is one of the more active volcanoes in the world. The Sangay National Park also provides significant habitat for a rich flora and fauna, including many threatened species such as the Mountain Tapir and the Spectacled Bear. 

Criterion (vii): The Sangay National Park contains one of the world’s most complex series of ecological habitats. With an altitudinal range extending from 900 to 5,319 metres above sea level, the park includes three volcanoes: Tungurahua (5,016m), Sangay (5,230m), and Altar (5,319m). These volcanoes have a superlative aesthetic beauty, including a rare combination of grasslands, rainforests and many other fragile habitats. The property includes a vast system of wetlands with 327 lakes, covering a surface of 31.5 km2, which protect and generate environmental services of local, national and regional importance. The park also contains one of the largest areas of páramo (a montane grassland vegetation) occurring in Ecuador. 

Criterion (viii): Sangay (a perfect cone-shaped volcano) is notable globally for its long period of continuous activity. The area exhibits a rugged topography with deep, steep-sided valleys, abundant cliffs and many rocky jagged peaks. A number of large rivers, draining eastwards into the Amazon Basin, are characterized by fast and dramatic variations in water level. Run-off is extremely rapid due to high rainfall and steep slopes. Erosion is a constant danger, although controlled by thick forest vegetation. Numerous waterfalls occur, especially in the hanging valleys of the glacial zone along the eastern edge of the Cordillera.

Criterion (ix): The presence of an active volcano means that primary succession is a continual process which influences species composition in a number of special ecosystems in the park, including rainforest, cloud forest, grasslands and moorlands (páramos). For example, many plant species in the páramo, in particular bunch grasses and cushion plants, have adapted to cold weather conditions and have evolved specialised structures for water capture. These areas also provide an excellent example of ongoing succession, where volcanic ash creates fertile soil and new habitats for plant colonization. Although the flora is poorly known, at least 3,000 species are expected to occur in the park and, given the special conditions, probably exhibit a high degree of endemism. At the same time the associated fauna, including a large number of birds and insects, is also expected to be unique. The park comprises two Endemic Bird Areas, the Central Andean páramo (home to some 11 bird species of restricted range), and the Ecuador-Peru East Andes (home to 17 restricted-range species). It is important to note that the high diversity of ecosystems and different vegetation types in the park increases the likelihood of evolutionary changes. 

Criterion (x): Natural vegetation has been well conserved and covers around 84.5% of the entire park. With its different ecosystems, the park has the best and least disturbed assemblage of native species in the region. At least 3,000 species of flowering plants are expected to occur in the park and recent reports describe 107 mammal, 430 bird, 33 amphibian, 14 reptile and 17 fish species. Perhaps the highest profile animal is the endangered Mountain Tapir, for which the Sangay Park represents one of its last refuges. The park is also one of the three protected areas with the largest populations of Spectacled Bear, classified as vulnerable. Other emblematic species include the Andean Condor, Andean Cock-of-the-rock, Jaguar and Giant Anteater, classified as vulnerable because its populations are declining in many parts of its range. The Lowland Tapir, another vulnerable rainforest species, only survives in undisturbed areas. 

Integrity

This undisturbed area is sufficiently large (271,925 ha) so that its ecosystems can continue to provide ecological services and undergo natural biological processes. Located in the middle of the Ecuadorian Andes, the area contains no human settlements. Sangay was declared a National Park in 1979 and included in the World Heritage List in 1983. In 1992 the park was extended to the south, increasing its area by 245,800 ha, although this extension was not included as part of the World Heritage property. 15,651 ha of park were excluded in May 2004, but the area inscribed as World Heritage was not reduced. Today, the Park covers an area of 502,105 ha of which 271,925 ha is considered as World Heritage. An executive management plan, approved in 2005, has been used as a management tool for the area and is kept updated. 

Protection and management requirements

A large part of the subtropical forest in the lowlands along the eastern border of the Park has been converted to grasslands for cattle ranching and agriculture, and these activities that represent the most significant threats to the property, including the risk of encroachment and livestock entering the property, illegal hunting and fishing are also an ongoing concern. In order to address these problems, the Ministry of Environment is permanently monitoring the area and implements local management actions as part of the management programs of the protected area, with principal objectives to reduce and / or eliminate the threats to the OUV of the property. 

The area was placed on the World Heritage List in Danger from 1992 to 2005, mainly due to the construction of the Guamote - Macas road, as well as from threats caused by grazing and illegal hunting.  The park was seriously affected by the building of the road, which now separates the World Heritage site from the southern extension of the park. Impacts included contamination of the Upano River and nearby lakes, the use of dynamite, microclimate changes and indirect effects including new settlements, cattle ranching, illegal hunting and deforestation.  However, in 2005 a new management plan was adopted defining strategies for the restoration of the zones affected by the road, as well as developing participative management of the park in order to reduce conflicts over land use and the relationship between the local population and wildlife.  Following this the park was removed from the List in of World Heritage in Danger.  Many programmes have been implemented in order to improve management efficiency, develop participative community management and increase environmental education, among others. 

The Ecuadorian Government recognizes environmental principles in its 2008 Constitution, declaring the State as responsible for the management and administration of its protected areas in order to guarantee biodiversity conservation and to maintain ecosystem ecological functions. The State works with provincial and local governments, other state institutions, non-governmental organizations and communities in order to achieve these goals.

Notes
Property inscribed for both geological and ecological values under natural criterion N (ii) before 1994. Criterion N (i) [Operational Guidelines 2002] was added. For more details see Decision 30.COM 8D.1.
Links
 View photos from OUR PLACE the World Heritage collection

Parque Nacional Sangay (Ecuador OnLine)(spanish only)

Protectedplanet.net

Activities 1
Enhancing our Heritage- Monitoring and managing for success in World Natural Heritage sites
Ecuador
Date of Inscription: 1983
Criteria: (vii)(viii)(ix)(x)
Property : 271,925 ha

Dossier: 260
Provinces of Morona Santiago, Chimborazo and Tungurahua
S1 49 59.988 W78 19 59.988
List of World Heritage in Danger

Inscription Year on the List of World Heritage in Danger

1992 -2005
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2008 2007 2006 2005 2004 2003 2001 2000 1999 1998 1997 1996 1995 1994 1993 1992 1991 1989
Protections
by other conservation instruments

1 protection / 1 element

Geoparks (1 element)

Tungurahua Volcano UNESCO Global Geopark

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026