World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Jodrell Bank Observatory
Jodrell Bank Observatory
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Jodrell Bank Observatory

Located in a rural area of northwest England, free from radio interference, Jodrell Bank is one of the world's leading radio astronomy observatories. At the beginning of its use, in 1945, the property housed research on cosmic rays detected by radar echoes. This observatory, which is still in operation, includes several radio telescopes and working buildings, including engineering sheds and the Control Building. Jodrell Bank has had substantial scientific impact in fields such as the study of meteors and the moon, the discovery of quasars, quantum optics, and the tracking of spacecraft. This exceptional technological ensemble illustrates the transition from traditional optical astronomy to radio astronomy (1940s to 1960s), which led to radical changes in the understanding of the universe.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Jodrell Bank Observatory was important in the pioneering phase and later evolution of radio astronomy. It reflects scientific and technical achievements and interchanges related to the development of entirely new fields of scientific research. This led to a revolutionary understanding of the nature and scale of the Universe. The site has evidence of every stage of the history of radio astronomy, from its emergence as a new science to the present day.

Jodrell Bank Observatory is located in a rural area in northwest England. Originally, scientific activity was located at the southern end of the site, and from that time activity has moved to the north across the site with many new instruments developed and then abandoned. Remnants of early scientific instruments survive.

At the south end of the site is the location of the Mark II Telescope and it is bounded by an ensemble of modest research buildings in which much of the early work of the Observatory took place.

To the north of the Green, the site is dominated by the 76 metre diameter Lovell Telescope which sits in a working compound containing a number of engineering sheds and the Control Building. There are spaces open to the general public which include visitor facilities set around the Lovell Telescope. Other visitor facilities are outside the property to the northeast.

Jodrell Bank Observatory is the hub of the UK’s national wide array of up to seven radio telescopes (e-MERLIN) including the Lovell and Mark II Telescopes.

Criterion (i): Jodrell Bank Observatory is a masterpiece of human creative genius related to its scientific and technical achievements. The adaptation and development of radar and radio frequency reflectivity to develop radically new equipment, such as the Transit Telescope and Lovell Telescope, were a key part in the development of entirely new fields of scientific research and led to a dramatic change in the understanding of the Universe. The Observatory was important in the pioneering phase and later evolution of radio astronomy.

Criterion (ii): Jodrell Bank Observatory represents an important interchange of human values over a span of time and on a global scale on developments in technology related to radio astronomy. The scientific work at Jodrell Bank was at the heart of a global collaborative network. In particular, several important technological developments such as very large paraboloidal dish telescopes and interferometer were developed at the Observatory, and were later influential in scientific endeavours in many parts of the world.

Criterion (iv): Jodrell Bank Observatory represents an outstanding example of a technological ensemble which illustrates a significant stage in human history (1940s-1960s) – the transition from optical astronomy to radio astronomy and the associated consequence for the understanding of the Universe through multi-wavelength astrophysics. The property is also associated with the peacetime development of ‘Big Science’ as a major change in the way in which scientific research was supported and undertaken. The surviving evidence at the property related to the evolutionary development of radio astronomy from the post-war pioneering phase through to sophisticated, large scale research activity in the field makes Jodrell Bank an outstanding example of such a technological ensemble.

Criterion (vi): Jodrell Bank Observatory is directly and tangibly associated with events and ideas of outstanding universal significance. The development of the new field of radio astronomy at the property lead to a revolutionary understanding of the Universe which was only possible through research beyond the possibilities of optical astronomy to explore the electromagnetic spectrum beyond visible light. Understanding of the nature and scale of the Universe has been dramatically changed by research in radio astronomy at the Observatory.

Integrity

The property retains all attributes that document its development as a site of pioneering astronomical research. Practically all stages of development from the very beginning, with improvised, re-used or borrowed equipment, onwards are represented by buildings, physical remains or in some cases archaeological remnants. Some important stages, such as represented by the large Transit Telescope, have not survived intact although traces remain. The later, large scale and far more ambitious instruments are still present at the property. This includes the iconic Lovell Telescope with its Control Building. The property also retains many quite modest structures which are, none the less, important for their research use, or which otherwise supported the work of the Observatory.

In general, all the structures are very well preserved and the property continues to be dominated by the large scale Lovell Telescope and Mark II Telescope. However, several early wooden buildings have suffered from neglect and dis-use. Their restoration is to be undertaken. The grounds are well cared for. Recent buildings have a simple and subdued character, which do not detract from the overall appreciation of the property.

The Consultation zone, buffer zone of the property, protects the scientific capabilities of the Observatory from radio emissions in its vicinity, contributing to maintenance of the functional integrity of the property.

Authenticity

The location of the property has continued unchanged, and the largely agricultural setting is essentially identical apart from the construction of the Square Kilometre Array building as part of the ongoing scientific use of the Observatory. The form and design has evolved through time reflecting the important development history of the property. This includes the somewhat improvised character of many structures indicative of the priority given to scientific research rather than the quality of buildings. Materials and substance have been mostly retained although there has been some replacement of deteriorated materials over time. The property retains its ongoing scientific use.

Protection and management requirements

Most of the attributes of Jodrell Bank Observatory have been listed under the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990. The two major telescopes have been listed in the highest category, Grade 1. There are some elements which have no listing at the present time, although they are managed for their heritage values as part of the property.

In addition, World Heritage inscription affords all attributes a protection status equivalent to the highest level or Grade 1, in accordance with the National Planning Policy Framework (2012) and the spatial planning system which operates through several pieces of legislation, including the Town and Country Planning Act 1990. Any changes to listed buildings require approval.

The buffer zone is based on the Jodrell Bank Radio Telescope Consultation Zone which has operated effectively to protect the Observatory for many decades. It was established by the Town and Country Planning (Jodrell Bank Radio Telescope) Direction 1973.

The property is managed by the University of Manchester with a committee, the Jodrell Bank Site Governance Group responsible for coordination. This committee includes key internal stakeholders such as the three main site user groups. Each of the site user groups has its own well-developed and independent management and operational structures. Roles managing the heritage of the Observatory are integrated with the daily work of the Jodrell Bank Centre for Astrophysics, responsible for scientific and engineering research, telescope operations and engineering, and the Jodrell Bank Discovery Centre which is responsible for visitor management and heritage coordination. These user groups are supported by other management groups within the University. The third site user group is the Square Kilometre Array Organisation, located just outside the property within the buffer zone but within the overall Observatory.

The management of the property is based on existing University structures, to be augmented by a World Heritage Site Steering Committee which will have oversight of the property and undertake coordination between the University, users and external stakeholders. The Conservation Management Plan (2016) provides an overview of the instruments and procedures for the effective management of the property. The plan, supplemented by an extensive Site Gazetteer, is currently being updated.

The Observatory has a long experience with managing visitors. There is a current tourism management plan and enhanced presentation of the property is ongoing.

Links
Portal to the Heritage of Astronomy

Jodrell Bank Discovery Centre

News  1
Six cultural sites added to UNESCO’s World Heritage List
7 July 2019
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
Date of Inscription: 2019
Criteria: (i)(ii)(iv)(vi)
Property : 17.38 ha

Buffer zone: 18,569.22 ha
Dossier: 1594
N53 14 2.1 W2 18 13.9
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026