World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Burgos Cathedral
Burgos Cathedral
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Burgos Cathedral

Our Lady of Burgos was begun in the 13th century at the same time as the great cathedrals of the Ile-de-France and was completed in the 15th and 16th centuries. The entire history of Gothic art is summed up in its superb architecture and its unique collection of works of art, including paintings, choir stalls, reredos, tombs and stained-glass windows.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The Burgos Cathedral is located in the historical centre of the Spanish city of the same name, in the Autonomous Community of Castilla y León, in the northern Iberian Peninsula. The inscribed property encompasses 1.03 ha.

Construction on the Cathedral began in 1221 and was completed in 1567. It is a comprehensive example of the evolution of Gothic style, with the entire history of Gothic art exhibited in its superb architecture and unique collection of art, including paintings, choir stalls, reredos, tombs, and stained-glass windows.

The plan of the Cathedral is based on a Latin Cross of harmonious proportions of 84 by 59 metres. The three-story elevation, the vaulting, and the tracery of the windows are closely related to contemporary models of the north of France. The portals of the transept (the Puerta del Sarmental to the south and the Puerta de la Coronería to the north) may also be compared to the great sculpted ensembles of the French royal domain, while the enamelled, brass tomb of Bishop Mauricio resembles the so-called Limoges goldsmith work. Undertaken after the Cathedral, the two-storied cloister, which was completed towards 1280, still fits within the framework of the French high Gothic.

After a hiatus of nearly 200 years, work resumed on the Burgos Cathedral towards the middle of the 15th century and continued for more than 100 years. The work done during this time consisted of embellishments of great splendour, assuring the Cathedral’s continued world-renown status. The workshop was composed of an international team, and among the most famous architects were Juan de Colonia, soon relieved by his son Simon (responsible for the towers and open spires of the facade, the Constable's chapel, and the Saint Anne's chapel) and Felipe de Borgoña, assisted by numerous collaborators (responsible for the choir, cupola, and lantern tower over the transept crossing). When two of these architects, Juan de Vallejo and Juan de Castañeda, completed the prodigious cupola with its starred vaulting in 1567, the Burgos Cathedral unified one of the greatest known concentrations of late Gothic masterpieces: the Puerta de la Pellejería (1516) of Francisco de Colonia, the ornamental grill and choir stalls, the grill of the chapel of the Presentation (1519), the retable of Gil de Siloe in the Constable's chapel, the retable of Gil de Siloe and Diego de la Cruz in Saint Anne's chapel, the staircase of Diego de Siloe in the north transept arm (1519), the tombs of Bishop Alonso de Cartagena, Bishop Alonso Luis Osorio de Acuña, the Abbot Juan Ortega de Velasco, the Constable Pedro Hernández de Velasco and, his wife Doña Mencía de Mendoza, etc.

Thereafter, the cathedral continued to be a monument favoured by the arts: the Renaissance retable of the Capilla Mayor by Rodrigo and Martin de la Haya, Domingo de Berriz, and Juan de Anchieta (1562-1580), the tomb of Enrique de Peralta y Cardenas in the chapel of Saint Mary, the chapel of Santa Tecla, and the "trascoro" of the 18th century. 

Criterion (ii): Burgos Cathedral has exerted, at different times throughout history, a considerable influence on the evolution of architecture and the arts. The Cathedral played an important role in the diffusion of the forms of 13th-century, French Gothic art in Spain. The internationally important Cathedral’s workshop in the 15th and 16th centuries, where artists from the Rhineland, Burgundy, and Flanders trained Spanish architects and sculptors, created one of the most flourishing schools at the end of the Middle Ages. The Cathedral’s also served as a model throughout the 19th century, i.e. the French architect Garnier was inspired by the staircase of Diego de Siloe when he created that of the Opera in Paris.

Criterion (iv): Burgos offers a celebrated example of an integral Gothic cathedral with its chapels, cloister, and annexes. Built over more than four centuries, the Cathedral bears testimony to the creative genius of architects, sculptors, and craftsmen throughout these periods.

Criterion (vi): Burgos Cathedral, with the tomb of El Cid and his wife Doña Jimena, is intimately linked to the history of the Reconquista and Spanish unity. Several members of the early royal house of Castile rest beneath the main altar. The memory of Saint Ferdinand is linked to the construction of this symbolic monument of the Spanish monarchy. 

Integrity

The property contains all key attributes to express its Outstanding Universal Value. The monument has been maintained as an integral Gothic cathedral, with chapels, cloister, and annexes; and is an extraordinary summary of European Gothic influences, which can be admired in every component of the structure, from the facades and chapels to the stained glass windows and sculptures. Regular works of maintenance have helped to sustain the material integrity of the monument. There are no negative effects from urban development, since it is legally protected at the highest level of Spanish law, with every action strictly controlled to preserve the Outstanding Universal Value of the property. 

Authenticity

The Burgos Cathedral retains all the key features of authenticity in respect to location, materials, form, and design. Over time, continuous maintenance works have taken place under control and supervision of the Administration Departments in charge of protection and conservation of Cultural Heritage. The basis for these interventions is set out in the Director Plan. Regular restoration works in different parts of the monument have been undertaken, as well as several studies – including chemical and microclimatic analyses, and on the deterioration of the materials, especially the stone, due to dampness – in order to maintain the extraordinary cultural value of the monument. As a result, the authenticity of the Burgos Cathedral has been preserved. 

Protection and management requirements

The protection and management of Burgos Cathedral is under the responsibility and supervision of the Junta de Castilla y León, through the General Directorate of Cultural Heritage, and the Cathedral Chapter as the owner of the property.

Any intervention on the Cathedral requires administrative authorisation according to the current Cultural Heritage Laws (Law 12/2002, 11 July, of Cultural Heritage of Castilla y León y Decree 37/2007, 19 April, that approves the Rules for the Protection of Cultural Heritage in Castilla y León and Law 16/1985, 25 June, of Spanish Historic Heritage). As a result, the Commission for Cultural Heritage of Castilla y León must approve all projects concerning the Cathedral prior to initiation.

The Burgos Cathedral has a Director Plan used as an instrument to analyse and plan any needed interventions for its adequate conservation. The Plan guarantees the constant maintenance of the Cathedral.

In respect to urban planning, a Special Plan for the Protection of the Historic City includes all the monumental surroundings of the Cathedral, which also overlaps with the surroundings of the Route of Santiago de Compostela. The Special Plan sets out the regulations for this area, with strict guidelines for general, urban development and for the uses of buildings in this area. In particular, the protection level of the Cathedral in this Plan is fully comprehensive, and the authorized actions are: consolidation, restoration, and conservation, as well as the use of adaptations that do not result in deterioration or irreversible interventions.

Links
Ministerio de Educación, Cultura y Deporte (in Spanish)

Catedral de Burgos

World Heritage Sites in Spain (Tourist Office of Spain)

News  2
World Heritage sites participate in Earth Hour 2013
22 March 2013
World Heritage sites participate in Earth Hour
28 March 2012
Media
play_arrow Burgos Cathedral (UNESCO/NHK)
Spain
Date of Inscription: 1984
Minor boundary modification inscribed year: 2014
Criteria: (ii)(iv)(vi)
Property : 1.03 ha

Buffer zone: 78.107 ha
Dossier: 316bis
Province of Burgos, Autonomous Community of Castile-Leon
N42 20 26.64 W3 42 14.44
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

1998 1994 1993
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026