World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Abu Mena
Abu Mena
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Assistance
Abu Mena

The church, baptistry, basilicas, public buildings, streets, monasteries, houses and workshops in this early Christian holy city were built over the tomb of the martyr Menas of Alexandria, who died in A.D. 296.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Abu Mena is located south of Alexandria, between Wadi el-Natrun and Alexandria itself. It represents the development of an early Christian pilgrimage Centre from the 5th to the 7th centuries AD. Growing up around the tomb of the martyred Saint Mena, which was thought to cause miracles, the ancient pilgrimage Centre developed into an unparalleled, sprawling complex of early Christian monastic architecture. The site is an outstanding example of a major, early Christian monasticism and pilgrimage Centre with a distinctive artistic character, blending Egyptian architectural traditions with those of Europe and Asia Minor that advanced Christian practices. The site was important in attracting Christian pilgrims in antiquity and represents a mixture of religious, funerary and living architecture. In addition to the built remains in situ, papyrus and ostraca found at the site are exhibited in several museums around the world and attest to the international significance of the property.

The archaeological site contains the remains of a large ecclesiastical complex with a baptistery and two churches at its Centre, which, along with the Tomb church with the cave of the Saint and the cruciform shaped pilgrim’s church, form one large architectural complex. Two other churches are situated in the northern and eastern neighbourhoods. The so-called Eastern Church represents the spiritual Centre of the monastic settlement in the area. Besides these churches, several public buildings serve as pilgrims’ rest houses. Two public baths, several workshops and cisterns as well as olive, oil, raisin, wine presses and pottery kilns, are to be found at the property as well as the remains of the civil settlement around the ecclesiastical buildings. The main buildings were constructed with ashlar masonry of limestone set in lime mortar, the columns were usually made of marble and evidence exists of mosaic decoration. Simpler buildings were erected using mud bricks covered with a fine lime plaster. The role of the site as a pilgrimage Centre is still strong and an energetic monastic community still inhabits the area, and relics thought to confer blessing are still stored within its confines. The site has retained its significance for the Coptic community for over fifteen centuries.

Criterion (iv): Abu Mena is an outstanding example of one of the first early Christian monastic Centre developed in the Near East. It was also a major pilgrim Centre with a much larger settlement than many of its contemporary sites in the Near East. Its architectural elements, in a wide range of building types, were strongly influenced by Egyptian practice, and express clearly the articulation of traditional Egyptian architecture with various other styles from the Mediterranean basin and were a significant advancement of early Christian architecture and practices.

Integrity

All the elements necessary to express the Outstanding Universal Value including the remains of Abu Mena archaeological structures with its composite plan are present within the property and the property therefore meets the conditions of integrity. The integrity of the property is stable as rising water related to irrigation systems of the surrounding agricultural lands are being contained through a dewatering project and its monitoring and maintenance system. The fabric of the churches, the tomb of Saint Mena, the pilgrims’ rest houses, public baths, workshops and cisterns is stable, and the periodic maintenance of these archaeological elements is ongoing, although the property is still under pressure from the risks of heavy rains, winds, humidity, and fires.

Authenticity

The attributes that underpin the authenticity of the property are the overall design of the monastery and its buildings and the survival of the original building materials, first recorded by Kaufmann in excavations of 1905. These include limestone, bricks, mortars, marble, the unique overall design, the planning of the Christian Centre, and its completely preserved holy marble settlement. Although complete historical structures are few, the lower portions, ground plans, and some vertical elements still remain. These attributes are truthfully expressed by their form and design, and by their materials and substance. The original urban layout has been retained in its entirety along with surviving buildings, which include a great basilica, the Martyr’s tomb, churches, hostels, and public buildings and olive, raisin, wine presses reflect the development of industry and technology in this early historical area (the 4th century).

Protection and management requirements

The framework of regulations and the Antiquities protection law in Egypt ensure appropriate, qualified, and effective legal protection. Abu Mena World Heritage Site has been registered within the category of Islamic and Coptic antiquities since 1956, thus applying the Antiquities Protection Law No. 117 of 1983, amended by Law No. 3 of 2010, Law 91 of 2018 and Law No. 20 of 2020. The Antiquities Law No.117 of 1983 and its amendments ensure the protection of the property. Since its inscription on the World Heritage List in 1979, the property has become a national heritage park, which dictates strict measures for protection.

Within the national legal and administrative framework, the Ministry of Tourism and Antiquities (MoTA) represented by the Supreme Council of Antiquities (SCA) is responsible for the protection, conservation and management of the Abu Mena World Heritage Site and its buffer zone, and regulation of all antiquities and archaeological excavations in Egypt. Abu Mena comes within the control and management of the Islamic and Coptic and Jewish Antiquities Sector of the SCA. The neighbouring Saint Mina Monastery is consulted informally on management aspects of the archaeological site.

The Supreme Council of Antiquities issues permits for all types of conservation-restoration works on the registered sites, including all types of monuments. The main body (Islamic, Coptic and Jewish Antiquities Sector), ensuring the protection of the visual integrity of the property within the designated protection zones of the property, is responsible for implementing the Egyptian Antiquities Protection Law no. 117 of 1983 amended by law No. 61 of 2010, No. 91 of 2018 and No 20 of 2020 to protect the monuments of the property, organize the administrative structure, formalize its departments and describe its functions, organize all activities related to the archaeological sites restoration, rehabilitation, and reuse projects, and discuss critical issues with all stakeholders. There are also Egyptian laws and regulations to protect the property, such as Law No. 689 of 1956 to determine the public interest, Agricultural Law No. 53 of 1966, Law No. 143 of 1981 for Desert land, Irrigation and drainage law No. 12 of 1984, and Law No. 149 of 2019 for civil associations.

There is a five-year management plan covering the inscribed area of the property and buffer zone. The MoTA team develops a long-term plan based on the monitoring of the implementation of the plan. Work substantially starts on the long-term plan within one year from the implementation of the plan. The final Management Plan ensures the systematic and comprehensive conservation and management of the property.

The management plan of the Abu Mena World Heritage property offers a collective vision and provides decision-making tools for preservation and conservation of all components of the property in response to many assessments conducted in its preparation, detailed policies, and objectives for general site protection, conservation, and management. The plan provides an anchor to involve all stakeholders related to the property and its buffer zone. In the course of its preparation, there were large numbers of workshops and meetings. These were determined after stakeholders’ assessments had been established. The Management Plan documents the property’s components and identifies rehabilitation projects for each of the architectural components as well as plans for archaeological excavations and conservation; the Plan also includes designs for the visitor facilities and improvement of access to the property, and proposals for regulation of the visitor flow. Detailed strategies and actions are also formulated in order to implement the management plan and the monitoring results of the first stage will be considered to set the long-term master plan.

Moreover, the entire property and surrounding lands have been under the protective purview of the very careful Abu Mena monastic community for centuries which assures a great measure of security around the archaeological vestiges. To address factors that threaten the property, efforts continue to manage and monitor the effects of rising groundwater. A project to lower the underground water is being implemented to halt any further rising of the water table, and an efficient system for monitoring the water table has been established. Conservation and restoration of the archaeological elements of the property is ongoing. Plans for conservation and continued maintenance actions are implemented by the Ministry of Tourism and Antiquities in collaboration with the Ministry of irrigation and water resources, Saint Mina Monastery and Alexandria Governorate according to a timeframe of the Corrective measures program.

Links
Ministry of Tourism and Antiquities' website page

 View photos from OUR PLACE the World Heritage collection

Tour Egypt's website page

News  2
Three sites on the African continent removed from the List of World Heritage in Danger
9 July 2025
World Heritage Committee Inscribes Two Sites on the the List of World Heritage in Danger
12 December 2001
Media
play_arrow Abu Mena (UNESCO/NHK)
Egypt
Date of Inscription: 1979
Criteria: (iv)
Property : 182.72 ha

Dossier: 90
Mariut desert, District of Burg al-Arab, Gouvernate of Al Iskandariyah (Alexandria)
N30 50 9 E29 40 0
List of World Heritage in Danger

Inscription Year on the List of World Heritage in Danger

2001 -2025
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2025 2024 2023 2021 2019 2018 2017 2016 2015 2014 2013 2012 2011 2010 2009 2008 2007 2006 2005 2004 2003 2001 1992
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026