World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
The par force hunting landscape in North ...
The par force hunting landscape in North Zealand
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
The par force hunting landscape in North Zealand

Located about 30 km northeast of Copenhagen, this cultural landscape encompasses the two hunting forests of Store Dyrehave and Gribskov, as well as the hunting park of Jægersborg Hegn/Jægersborg Dyrehave. This is a designed landscape where Danish kings and their court practiced par force hunting, or hunting with hounds, which reached its peak between the 17th and the late 18th centuries, when the absloute monarchs transformed it into a landscape of power. With hunting lanes laid out in a star system, combined with an orthogonal grid pattern, numbered stone posts, fences and a hunting lodge, the site demonstrates the application of Baroque landscaping principles to forested areas.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The par force hunting landscape in North Zealand series covers the former royal hunting forests of Store Dyrehave and Gribskov, traces of connecting roads between them, and the former royal hunting park of Jægersborg Dyrehave/Jægersborg Hegn. The entire former royal forest landscape covered a much larger area with a number of royal castles. The components have been selected as they encompass a completeness of attributes illustrating the development of the Baroque par force hunting landscape as an emblematic and functional spatial entity. Designed and created intentionally by Man, the par force hunting landscape exemplifies a 17th-18th-century landscape created to perform courtly hunts. Its layout results from the combination of French and German design models based on a central-star grid system, combined with an orthogonal grid subdivision, which optimised its function during the hunt, and makes it emblematic of an absolute European monarch, his role in society, and his reason and power to control nature. The Outstanding Universal Value of the landscape lies in the spatial organisation of the hunting forests, hunting roads, buildings, emblematic markers, numbered stone posts, stone fences, and numerical road names conveying an understanding of the practical application of the design as a means of orientation.

Criterion (ii): The par force hunting landscape in North Zealand exceptionally exemplifies how the interchange of Baroque values in Europe influenced developments in landscape design in the 17th-18th centuries, and particularly bears witness to the influence exerted by French and German designed hunting landscapes. These models were adapted to the specific situation of the Danish terrain and to the Danish kings’ aspirations. The series illustrates a development in design that evolved alongside the landscape function during par force hunts also in terms of its increasing symbolic significance.

Criterion (iv): As a landscape of power created by an absolute monarch in the late 17th century, the par force hunting landscape in North Zealand exemplifies a significant stage in European landscape design applied to hunting grounds when the rise of scientific thought took place within the context of absolutist ambitions. The orthogonal geometry conceived for its design improved the octagon or circle-based star network used in French or German examples. In its infinite expandability, the orthogonal grid could give equal access to all parts of the forest; differently from radial examples, its diagonals created more than one star point suitable for the rendez-vous.

Integrity

The series comprising the two hunting forests Store Dyrehave and Gribskov, the six partially preserved road traces between them, and the hunting park of Jægersborg Dyrehave and Jægersborg Hegn exhibits all attributes necessary to express the Outstanding Universal Value of the par force hunting landscape in North Zealand. The preserved forest cover, despite interventions of reforestation, the hunting roads and their mutual situation, the numbered stones, the fences and the emblematic markers altogether give a clear understanding of a spatial plan that focused on nature and developed in line with changes in the practical and emblematic demands of the absolute monarch. Visual and functional integrity of some components has suffered from the effects of development; however the property currently does not suffer from development or neglect and urban pressure in the wider setting is under control. The character of the wider setting facilitates the understanding of the property.

Authenticity

The history of North Zealand as a royal estate, later to become state-owned, is thoroughly documented in sources of high credibility. Historical maps confirm that the forest cover and the road systems realised according to the original spatial plan have survived to a large extent. In Store Dyrehave most secondary rides have disappeared, as has the forest cover, which has been changed due to later reforestation, and parts of the roads connecting Gribskov and Store Dyrehave. All original road dams and the stone fence around Store Dyrehave are authentic, while wooden bridges and fences have been replaced several times. Stone posts in Store Dyrehave reflect their original positions. The king's monogram, crown and initials document the authenticity of Kongestenen, but the mound it was placed on has been disturbed. The series gives a clear sense of the spatial development of the par force hunting landscape. The character of the wider setting contributes to the understanding of the series as the best-preserved elements of a wider historic designed hunting landscape.

Protection and management requirements

The property is almost entirely state- or municipality-owned and is protected by national acts and enactments, regional plans and agreements, and municipal and local plans. Almost all activities are determined by the budget. Responsibility for the forest management rests with the Nature Agency. Fifteen-year management plans also stipulate how this protected cultural heritage should be managed. The Agency for Palaces and Cultural Properties manages Eremitageslottet and operates 10-year plans. The municipalities have 4-year municipal plans providing frameworks for local plans and guidelines to protect cultural heritage, including road traces in private ownership. The cooperation and coordination among all institutions and bodies with responsibilities in the property and buffer zones ensures the long-term effectiveness of protection and management and is granted by a Steering Committee representing state agencies, municipalities, and museums. As the public's awareness of the cultural heritage of the area, and their desire to return to it time and again, are vital to the successful long-term protection of the par force hunting landscape of North Zealand, the property is well equipped with public facilities, and the dissemination of knowledge should be based on a comprehensive strategy and focussed on the Outstanding Universal Value.
Links
Jægersborg Zoo

Museum Norsjælland

VisitNordsjælland

Instagram

Facebook

Par force hunting landscape in North Zealand

Activities 1
Cultural Landscapes
News  3
UNESCO launches new travel platform ‘World Heritage Journeys’ to promote sustainable tourism in the EU
13 September 2018
World Heritage Committee announces 2016 meeting in Istanbul, 24 new sites inscribed in Bonn
8 July 2015
Sites in Denmark, France and Turkey inscribed on UNESCO’s World Heritage List
4 July 2015
Denmark
Date of Inscription: 2015
Criteria: (ii)(iv)
Property : 4,543 ha

Buffer zone: 1,612.7 ha
Dossier: 1469
Serial: yes

Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026