World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Old City of Sana'a
Old City of Sana'a
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Assistance
Old City of Sana'a

Situated in a mountain valley at an altitude of 2,200 m, Sana’a has been inhabited for more than 2,500 years. In the 7th and 8th centuries the city became a major centre for the propagation of Islam. This religious and political heritage can be seen in the 103 mosques, 14 hammams and over 6,000 houses, all built before the 11th century. Sana’a’s many-storeyed tower-houses built of rammed earth (pisé) add to the beauty of the site.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Situated in a mountain valley at an altitude of 2,200 m, the Old City of Sana'a is defined by an extraordinary density of rammed earth and burnt brick towers rising several stories above stone-built ground floors, strikingly decorated with geometric patterns of fired bricks and white gypsum. The ochre of the buildings blends into the bistre-colored earth of the nearby mountains. Within the city, minarets pierce the skyline and spacious green bustans (gardens) are scattered between the densely packed houses, mosques, bath buildings and caravanserais.

Inhabited for more than 2,500 years, the city was given official status in the second century BC when it was an outpost of the Yemenite kingdoms. By the first century AD it emerged as a centre of the inland trade route. The site of the cathedral and the martyrium constructed during the period of Abyssinian domination (525-75) bear witness to Christian influence whose apogee coincided with the reign of Justinian. The remains of the pre-Islamic period were largely destroyed as a result of profound changes in the city from the 7th century onwards when Sana'a became a major centre for the spread of the Islamic faith as demonstrated by the archaeological remains within the Great Mosque, said to have been constructed while the Prophet was still living. Successive reconstructions of Sana'a under Ottoman domination beginning in the 16th century respected the organization of space characteristic of the early centuries of Islam while changing the appearance of the city and expanding it with a second city to the west. The houses in the old city are of relatively recent construction and have a traditional structure.

As an outstanding example of a homogeneous architectural ensemble reflecting the spatial characteristics of the early years of Islam, the city in its landscape has an extraordinary artistic and pictorial quality. Its many-storied buildings represent an outstanding response to defensive needs in providing spacious living quarters for the maximum number of residents within defensible city walls. The buildings demonstrate exceptional craftsmanship in the use of local materials and techniques. The houses and public buildings of Sana'a, which have become vulnerable as a result of contemporary social changes, are an outstanding example of a traditional, Islamic human settlement.

Described by historians, geographers and scholars of the early Islamic and medieval eras, Sana'a is associated with the civilizations of the Bible and the Koran.

Criterion (iv):Within its partially preserved wall, it offers an outstanding example of a homogeneous architectural ensemble, which design and detail translate an organization of space characteristic of the early centuries of Islam which has been respected over time.

Criterion (v): The houses of Sana'a, which have become vulnerable as a result of contemporary social changes, are an outstanding example of an extraordinary masterpiece, traditional human settlement.

Criterion (vi): Sana'a is directly and tangibly associated with the history of the spread of Islam in the early years of the Hegira. The Great mosque of Sana'a, built in year 6 of Hegira, is known as the first mosque built outside Mecca and Medina.The Old City of Sana'a has contributed to and played a major role in Yemeni, Arab and Islamic World history through the contributions of historical Yemeni figures including Al Hassan B. Ahmed Al Hamdany, Ahamed Al Razy and Al Shawkany.

Integrity (2011)

A significant proportion of all the attributes that express the Outstanding Universal Value are within the property. However, in certain quarters of the city, acceleration of new development is eroding its character. The visual integrity of the property is threatened by an increase in new modern hotels and telecommunication towers in the surrounding landscape.

The disappearance of the traditional juridical system or the application of new and supplementary ones, the accelerated social and economical changes, the rapid urban development within and around the city and the disappearance of open space as the bustans are gradually built over, are creating various unbearable pressures on the city and its inhabitants.

Authenticity (2011)

The attributes that carry Outstanding Universal Value are the overall design of the city and its buildings with their decorated façades, traditional building materials, and the open spaces (bustans, maqashe and sarah'at ) considered as part of the city's urban environment, together with the visual appearance of the city surrounded by mountains. The authenticity of these attributes is vulnerable to incorrect conservation practices and development. Associated intangible values relating to traditional socio-economic activities, including the very high percentage of home ownership, continue to be demonstrated. 

Protection and management requirements (2011)

The protection of the Old City of Sana'a is ensured by the Antiquities Law of 1997 as well as the Building Law of 2002. Protection will be improved when the Historical Cities Preservation Law comes into force. The preparation of a Conservation Plan, and of an exhaustive inventory of buildings of the city and its surroundings have been completed. The General Organization for the Preservation of the Historic Cities of Yemen (GOPHCY) aims to develop the Conservation Plan in the next few years. It is also proposed to establish a Conservation Unit to involve all stakeholders, who will be encouraged to participate in the preparation of the city Management Plan process. GOPHCY, established in 1990, is an independent body set up to create an appropriate strategy for sustainable development. After the new Law enters into force, it will become the overall authority for management of the World Heritage property.

In its decision concerning inscription, the World Heritage Committee "recommended that an adequate buffer zone should be established around the old city." This recommendation should be implemented in order to improve the protection of the property which also needs clearly defined boundaries.

In the long term, it is intended to adopt a clear strategy for sustainable preservation and development of the Old City and to reach a better control of the setting as well as ensuring the balance between commercial and residential activities.

Links
 View photos from OUR PLACE the World Heritage collection

Activities 4
World Heritage Earthen Architecture Programme (WHEAP)
World Heritage Cities Programme
The Inventory of the historic city of Sana'a: a tool for urban conservation
Cash for work: promoting local employment through heritage conservation in historic cities (Yemen)
News  10
Nearly Three-Quarters of World Heritage Sites Are at High Risk from Water-Related Hazards
1 July 2025
UNESCO Mobilizes Funds and Expertise to Safeguard Yemen’s Cultural Heritage
11 August 2020
UNESCO expresses concern while monitoring flash floods in the Old City of Sana’a
21 April 2020
Emergency Action Plan for the Safeguarding of Yemen’s Cultural Heritage announced
16 July 2015
More add
Media
play_arrow Old City of Sana'a (UNESCO/NHK)
Yemen
Date of Inscription: 1986
Criteria: (iv)(v)(vi)
Dossier: 385
Governorate of the capital Sana’a
N15 21 20 E44 12 29
List of World Heritage in Danger

Inscription Year on the List of World Heritage in Danger

2015 - Present
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2025 2024 2023 2021 2019 2018 2017 2016 2015 2014 2013 2012 2011 2001 1999 1998 1991 1990
Protections
by other conservation instruments

1 protection / 2 elements

2003 Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage (2 elements)

Arts, skills and practices associated with engraving on metals (gold, silver and copper)
Song of Sana’a

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026