World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Djoudj National Bird Sanctuary
Djoudj National Bird Sanctuary
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Assistance
Djoudj National Bird Sanctuary

Situated in the Senegal River delta, the Djoudj Sanctuary is a wetland of 16,000 ha, comprising a large lake surrounded by streams, ponds and backwaters. It forms a living but fragile sanctuary for some 1.5 million birds, such as the white pelican, the purple heron, the African spoonbill, the great egret and the cormorant.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis
In the Senegal River delta, the Djoudj National Park is a 16,000 ha wetland ecosystem that includes more than 1.5 million migratory birds. Comprised of lakes surrounded by streams, the property is a vital but fragile sanctuary for species such as the white pelican, African spoonbill, cormorant, pink flamingo and great egret.

Criterion (vii): By its location, Djoudj National Park is more than a haven for Palaearctic migratory birds. It is an oasis in the desert consisting of a chain of lakes, backwaters, fords and sandbanks.  It is the first migration stopover after crossing the Sahara for species of Palaearctic and Afrotropical birds. It should be noted that due to technical improvements to upgrade the conditions of migration reception (building nest boxes), species began to breed. With the annual renovation of these improvements and efforts to control the hydraulic system, the number of migratory as well as nesting species is increasing.

Criterion (x): The property is a wetland of around 16,000 ha comprising a large lake surrounded by streams, ponds and backwaters. This habitat hosts more than 1.5 million birds of 365 species including over 120 species of Palaearctic migrants. The property is a vital sanctuary for nesting species such as the white pelican (Pelecanus onocrotalus), the purple heron (Ardea purpurea), the African spoonbill (Platalea alba), the great egret (Casmerodius albus), the night heron (Nycticorax nycticorax) and the cormorant (Phalacrocorax carbo). The property also contains large populations of crocodiles and manatees.

Integrity 
The park boundaries are correctly defined, but the property faces significant threats:  agricultural chemicals are a source of water pollution for the Senegal River, threatening the delicate balance of the food chain; and the construction of a downstream dam project could severely disrupt the hydrological equilibrium of the property. Following the start-up of the Diama dam, located downstream from the park, the water balance of the property was severely disrupted. This resulted in the proliferation of invasive aquatic plants (Pistia stratoites, Lavinia molesta, Typha australis, etc.), the reduced amplitude of water levels, and decrease and / or disappearance of some bird colonies. For these reasons, the property was inscribed on the List of World Heritage in Danger during the periods 1984-1988 and 2000-2006.

Protection and management requirements
The protection of the property is governed by various national laws, and a development and management plan has been developed. No manner of exploitation is permitted except for scientific purposes. The property is managed by a management administration under the direct supervision of the State through the Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development and the National Parks Directorate. This administration works closely with an inter-village committee assisted by a team of eco guards involving local communities in solving management problems.  With great effort, the State Party reduced the proliferation of invasive species representing such a threat that they must be completely eradicated. This effort is one of the management priorities of the property, even if the main concern is the restoration of the ecological characteristics of the property in the long term,rdea  to ensure the return of the bird population to its previous levels.

Links
Protectedplanet.net

Activities 1
Protection measures against the impacts of agricultural and agro industrial projects in Djoudj National Bird Sanctuary
News  8
UNESCO supports women from local communities around the Djoudj National Bird Sanctuary
15 April 2024
Scientific Task Force on Avian Influenza and Wild Birds issues recommendation for countries at risk
15 February 2022
World Migratory Bird Day
8 May 2021
Information and consultation meeting on the avian influenza epidemic in Senegal and Mauritania
12 February 2021
More add
Senegal
Date of Inscription: 1981
Criteria: (vii)(x)
Property : 16,000 ha

Dossier: 25
Delta of the River Senegal
N16 24 52.567 W16 14 16.462
List of World Heritage in Danger

Inscription Year on the List of World Heritage in Danger

2000 -2006 1984 -1988
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2024 2023 2021 2011 2009 2007 2006 2005 2004 2003 2001 2000 1992 1991 1988 1987 1986 1985 1984 1983 1982
Protections
by other conservation instruments

2 protections / 2 elements

Biosphere Reserves (1 element)

Delta du Fleuve Senegal
RAMSAR (1 element)

Parc national des Oiseaux du Djoudj

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026