World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Medina of Essaouira (formerly Mogador)
Medina of Essaouira (formerly Mogador)
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Assistance
Medina of Essaouira (formerly Mogador)

Essaouira is an exceptional example of a late-18th-century fortified town, built according to the principles of contemporary European military architecture in a North African context. Since its foundation, it has been a major international trading seaport, linking Morocco and its Saharan hinterland with Europe and the rest of the world.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value
Brief synthesis

The Medina of Essaouira, formerly named Mogador (name originating from the Phoenician word Migdol meaning a « small fortress »), is an outstanding example of a fortified town of the mid-eighteenth century, surrounded by a wall influenced by the Vauban model. Constructed according to the principles of contemporary European military architecture, in a North African context, in perfect harmony with the precepts of Arabo-Muslim architecture and town-planning, it has played a major role over the centuries as an international trading seaport, linking Morocco and sub-Saharan Africa with Europe and the rest of the world. The town is also an example of a multicultural centre as proven by the coexistence, since its foundation, of diverse ethnic groups, such as the Amazighs, Arabs, Africans, and Europeans as well as multiconfessional (Muslim, Christian and Jewish). Indissociable from the Medina, the Mogador archipelago comprises a large number of cultural and natural sites of Outstanding Universal Value. Its relatively late foundation in comparison to other medinas of North Africa was the work of the Alaouite Sultan Sidi Mohamed Ben Abdallah (1757-1790) who wished to make this small Atlantic town a royal port and chief Moroccan commercial centre open to the outside world. Known for a long time as the Port of Timbuktu, Essaouira became one of the major Atlantic commercial centres between Africa and Europe at the end of the 18th century and during the 19th century.

Criterion (ii): Essaouira is an outstanding and well preserved example of a mid-18th century fortified seaport town, with a strong European influence translated to a North African context.

Criterion (iv): With the opening of Morocco to the rest of the world at the end of the 17th century, the Medina of Essaouira was laid out by a French architect who had been profoundly influenced by the work of the military engineer Vauban at Saint Malo.  For the most part, it has retained its appearance of a European town.

Integrity

Already completed by the 19th century and clearly defined by its ramparts, the Medina of Essaouira possesses all the essential components for its integrity.  Comprising a harmonious ensemble associated with natural elements (Mogador Archipelago) and high quality cultural elements, the town today retains its integrity and its original distinctive style. Despite its integrity being slightly altered, notably due to degradation of buildings in the Mellah district, the degree of loss does not compromise the significance of the property as a whole.

The state of conservation of the Medina of Essaouira is increasingly improved due to the efforts of the local authorities and the vigilance of the authorities directly concerned with its protection and presentation.

Authenticity

Founded in the middle of the 18th century, the Medina of Essaouira has for the most part conserved its authenticity as regards the conception and outline as well as the materials (use of local stone called manjour) and construction methods, and this in spite of some inadequate use of modern materials for repair and reconstruction work. Notwithstanding the sea swell and dampness elsewhere, the fortifications and urban fabric conserve, on the whole, their original configuration. 

Protection and management requirements

Protection measures essentially relate to the different laws for listing of historic monuments and sites, and particularly the Law 22-80 concerning the Moroccan heritage. Ownership of the elements that make up the historic town of Essaouira is divided between the State, the municipality, the Habous, the Israelite Alliance, cooperatives and private individuals. The 1988 urban plan No. 4001 provides for a buffer zone around the historic town within which construction is prohibited. Two significant protection and management measures are currently in the final stages of application.  These are the Master Plan for Urban Development of the town of Essaouira and the Safeguarding Plan for the Medina.

The local population, the public authorities and the associative areas are increasingly aware of the Outstanding Universal Value of the Medina. The Essaouira Urban Agency was created to ensure a better control of town development in general and the medina in particular. In parallel with other ministerial departments and services, this Agency should, plan and coordinate efforts and monitor the execution and implementation of the ongoing or planned work sites.  Contingent upon the establishment of a management plan for the medina that should both safeguard the architectural heritage and improve the living conditions of the local population, the authorities concerned for the protection and safeguard of the property must supervise the application of the development plan for the medina and the entire town of Essaouira

Links
 View photos from OUR PLACE the World Heritage collection

Activities 3
World Heritage Cities Programme
Culture|2030 Indicators National Profile of Morocco
Culture|2030 Indicators Urban Profile of the city of Essaouira
News  1
World Heritage Committee Inscribes 31 New Sites on the World Heritage List
13 December 2001
Events  1
Morocco and city of Essaouira Kick-Off workshop for the UNESCO Culture|2030 Indicators
17 Feb 2022 - 18 Feb 2022
Media
play_arrow Medina of Essaouira (formerly Mogador) (UNESCO/NHK)
Morocco
Date of Inscription: 2001
Criteria: (ii)(iv)
Property : 56.7 ha

Dossier: 753rev
Serial: yes

Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2025 2023 2008 2006 2005 2004
Protections
by other conservation instruments

2 protections / 3 elements

2003 Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage (2 elements)

Arts, skills and practices associated with engraving on metals (gold, silver and copper)
Gnawa
RAMSAR (1 element)

Archipel et dunes d'Essawira

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026