World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Rock-Hewn Churches of Ivanovo
Rock-Hewn Churches of Ivanovo
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Assistance
Rock-Hewn Churches of Ivanovo

In the valley of the Roussenski Lom River, in north east Bulgaria, a complex of rock-hewn churches, chapels, monasteries and cells developed in the vicinity of the village of Ivanovo. This is where the first hermits had dug out their cells and churches during the 12th century. The 14th-century murals testify to the exceptional skill of the artists belonging to the Tarnovo School of painting.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The frescos of the Ivanovo churches reveal an exceptional artistry and a remarkable artistic sensitivity for 14th century painting and Bulgarian medieval art; they are an important achievement in the Christian art of South-Eastern Europe. Posterior to the Khora monastery mosaics (Karia Djami) of 1303 - 10, these frescoes, by their very expressiveness surpass any other historical monuments discovered, characteristic of the Palaeologues style. Neo-classical in spirit and in elements of their subjects, the frescoes represent a departure from the canons of Byzantine iconography. They show close ties with expressive Hellenistic art and a clear preference for the nude, the landscape, an architectural background in a composition, drama, an emotional atmosphere - qualities which combine to make an exceptional masterpiece of the Tarnovo school of painting and monumental art.

The five historical monuments in this group (chapels, churches, etc.), dating from the 13th and 14th centuries, serve as examples that pave the way for the distinctive character development, and mastery in the art of the Second Bulgarian State /1187-1396/. The richness, the variety of the cells, chapels, churches, monastery complexes, the original architectural solutions - all set in a magnificent natural environment - confirm the value of this extraordinary historical grouping.

Criterion (ii): Many churches, chapels, monasteries and cells were cut into the natural rock along the Rusenski Lom river, during the 13-14th centuries. The "Church" frescoes reveal an exceptional artistry and a remarkable artistic sensitivity for 14th century painting and Bulgarian medieval art; they are an important achievement in the Christian art of South-Eastern Europe. Neo-classical in spirit and in elements of their subjects, the frescoes represent a departure from the canons of Byzantine iconography. They show close ties with expressive Hellenistic art and a clear preference for the nude, the landscape, an architectural background in a composition, drama, an emotional atmosphere - qualities which combine to make an exceptional masterpiece.

Criterion (iii): The extensive complexes of monasteries were built between the time of the Second Bulgarian State /1187-1396/ and the conquest of Bulgaria by the Ottoman Empire. The five historical monuments in this group, dating from the 13th and 14th centuries, the richness, the variety of the cells, chapels, churches, monastery complexes, the original architectural solutions - all of that set in a magnificent natural environment - confirm the value of this extraordinary historical grouping.

Integrity

The property encompasses within its boundaries all the components necessary to convey its outstanding universal value but the rock massif, where the churches are situated, has serious stability problems. Over the years a continuous programme of research, and scientific, technical and design projects, have focussed on strengthening and stabilising the rock formation. A programme was carried out for the "Investigation, identification, stabilization and waterproofing of the rock massif" for The Church of the Holy Virgin. All of the statistical analyses are based on processing meteorological and instrument data, and studies.

Authenticity

Created in the natural cavities of a karst massif, the authenticity of shape, material and substance of the Rock-hewn Churches of Ivanovo has been preserved. Urgent conservation work has been completed on the valuable 13th and 14th century murals, whilst cleaning, stabilization and presentation of The Church of the Holy Virgin murals has also been carried out. This involved minimal retouching work, and the maximum retention of the original.

In consequence of a rock collapse in the early 20th century, the 13th century ceiling murals from the buried church of St. Archangels, have been rescued and moved to a new substrate. The first stage of work on the 14th century murals of the collapsed St. Todor Church has also been completed.

Protection and management requirements

Through National Legislation the property has been protected, as a 'Reserve' since 1965 (Official Gazette No. 84 of 1965). Management is implemented through the Cultural Heritage Law (Official Gazette No.19 of 2009) and subdelegated legislation. This law regulates the research, studying, protection and promotion of the immovable cultural heritage in Bulgaria, and the development of Conservation and Management plans for its inscribed World Heritage List of immovable cultural properties.

Protection is also afforded by Ordinance No. 17 of the President of the Committee for Culture on Definition of Boundaries and Regimes of Use and Protection of Immovable Cultural Monuments outside Populated Areas (Official Gazette No. 35 of 1979); and The Protected Areas Act (Official Gazette No. 133 of 11 November 1998, as amended and supplemented).

In order to strengthen and stabilize the rock formation, there is a need to pursue the implementation of the conservation measures.

Links
Ivanovo Rock Churches – city of Ruse

Ivanovo Monastery “St. Michael the Archangel”

Ivanovo Municipality

www.museumruse.com

Media
play_arrow NHK World Heritage 100 Series
play_arrow Rock-Hewn Churches of Ivanovo (UNESCO/NHK)
Bulgaria
Date of Inscription: 1979
Criteria: (ii)(iii)
Property : 171.9 ha

Dossier: 45
Village of Ivanovo, 16 km from the town of Ruse, Province of Ruse
N43 41 41.4888 E25 59 16.4148
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

1994
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026