World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Fossil Hominid Sites of South Africa
Fossil Hominid Sites of South Africa
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Best Practice
Fossil Hominid Sites of South Africa

The Taung Skull Fossil Site, part of the extension to the site inscribed in 1999, is the place where in 1924 the celebrated Taung Skull – a specimen of the species Australopithecus africanus – was found. Makapan Valley, also in the site, features in its many archaeological caves traces of human occupation and evolution dating back some 3.3 million years. The area contains essential elements that define the origin and evolution of humanity. Fossils found there have enabled the identification of several specimens of early hominids, more particularly of Paranthropus, dating back between 4.5 million and 2.5 million years, as well as evidence of the domestication of fire 1.8 million to 1 million years ago.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The undulating landscape containing the fossil hominid sites of South Africa comprises dolomitic limestone ridges with rocky outcrops and valley grasslands, wooded along watercourses and in areas of natural springs. Most sites are in caves or are associated with rocky outcrops or water sources. The serial listing includes the Fossil Hominid Sites of Sterkfontein, Swartkrans, Kromdraai and Environs, and the Makapan Valley and Taung Skull Fossil Site. The Taung Skull, found in a limestone quarry at Dart Pinnacle amongst numerous archaeological and palaeontological sites south-west of the Sterkfontein Valley area, is a specimen of the species Australopithecus Africanus. Fossils found in the many archaeological caves of the Makapan Valley have enabled the identification of several specimens of early hominids, more particularly of Paranthropus, dating back between 4.5 million and 2.5 million years, as well as evidence of the domestication of fire 1.8 million to 1 million years ago. Collectively these sites have produced abundant scientific information on the evolution of modern humans over at least the past 3.5 million years.  They constitute a vast reserve of scientific information, with enormous potential. 

The sites contain within their deposits all of the key interrelated and interdependent elements in their palaeontological relationships.  Alongside and predating the hominid period of occupation is a sequence of fossil mammals, micro-mammals and invertebrates which provide a window onto faunal evolution, palaeobiology and palaeoecology stretching back into the Pliocene. This record has come to play a crucial role in furthering our understanding of human evolution and the appearance of modern human behaviour .

The fossil evidence contained within these sites proves conclusively that the African continent is the undisputed Cradle of Humankind. 

Criterion (iii): The nominated serial site bears exceptional testimony to some of the most important Australopithecine specimens dating back more than 3.5 million years. This therefore throws light on to the origins and then the evolution of humankind, through the hominisation process.

Criterion (vi): The serially nominated sites are situated in unique natural settings that have created a suitable environment for the capture and preservation of human and animal remains that have allowed scientists a window into the past.  Thus, this site constitutes a vast reserve of scientific data of universal scope and considerable potential, linked to the history of the most ancient periods of humankind.

Integrity (2005)

The Fossil Hominid Sites of Sterkfontein, Swartkrans, Kromdraai and Environs together with Makapan Valley and Taung Skull Fossil Site comprise five separate components situated in different provinces and each has a buffer zone. Collectively these components contain the necessary evidence of sites where abundant scientific information on the evolution of modern humans over the past 3.5 million years was uncovered.  Furthermore, the nominated serial site covers an area big enough to constitute a vast reserve of scientific information, with enormous potential.

Authenticity

As regards authenticity, the sites contain within their deposits all of the key interrelated and interdependent elements in their natural palaeontological relationships.  Thus, the breccia representing the cave fillings contains the fossilised remains of hominids, their lithicultural remains (from about 2.0 million years onwards), fossils of other animals, plants and pollen, as well as geochemical and sedimentological evidence of the conditions under which each member of the deposits was laid down.  They represent a succession of palaeo‑ecosystems.  The caves, breccias and strata from which quantities of fossils or tools have been extracted, together with the landscape are generally intact, but are vulnerable to development pressures, villagers’ use of the environment and tourism.

Protection and management requirements 

The components of the Fossil Hominid Sites of Sterkfontein, Swartkrans, Kromdraai and Environs together with Makapan Valley and Taung Skull Fossil Site are currently protected as National Heritage sites  in terms of the National Heritage Resources Act, 1999 (Act No. 25 of 1999). In terms of this legislation, n o person may destroy, damage, deface, excavate, alter, remove from its original position, subdivide or change the planning status of any heritage site without a permit issued by the heritage resources authority responsible for the protection of such site.

Management of each site is guided by the World Heritage Convention Act (Act No 49 of 1999); the National Environmental Protected Areas Act (Act No 57 of 2003), the National Environmental Management Act (Act No 107 of 1998), the National Environmental Management Biodiversity Act (Act No 10 of 2004) and the Physical Planning Act, 1967 (Act No. 88 of 1967) . 

In terms of these pieces of legislation, mining or prospecting is completely prohibited in a World Heritage Site and all developments are subjected to environmental impact assessments. 

There are also site management plans for each of the sites as well as monitoring and evaluation programmes for each.  

The five components of the property are situated in separate provinces in South Africa, each with a different combination of structures dealing with its management. Management issues at the five serial sites differ significantly. At the time of inscription of the first three sites it was envisaged that there would be a joint World Heritage Property Management Committee and that each Province and Site Management Authority would nominate members to the joint World Heritage Property Management Committee. It was envisaged that the function of the committee would be to streamline inter-site management, to discuss common management problems and to function as a communications forum for the sites. The equitable sharing of the benefits of increased tourism, joint funding proposals and the sharing of heritage-based skills were all issues to be considered.

Links
Maropeng, Cradle of Humankind's Facebook page

Maropeng and Sterkfontein Caves' Twitter page

Cradle of Humankind's Instagram page

 View photos from OUR PLACE the World Heritage collection

Cradle of Humankind's website page

News  2
Mostar, Macao and Biblical vestiges in Israel are among the 17 cultural sites inscribed on UNESCO’s World Heritage List
15 July 2005
World Heritage Committee Inscribes 48 New Sites on Heritage List
2 December 1999
Events  1
World Heritage and Impacts of Developments in the Africa region
23 May 2012 - 25 May 2012
South Africa
Date of Inscription: 1999
Significant modifications to the boundaries : 2005
Criteria: (iii)(vi)
Dossier: 915bis
Serial: yes

Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2025 2023 2021 2019 2017 2015 2013
Protections
by other conservation instruments

1 protection / 1 element

Biosphere Reserves (1 element)

Magaliesberg

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026