World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
The Causses and the Cévennes, Mediterranean ...
The Causses and the Cévennes, Mediterranean agro-pastoral Cultural Landscape
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
The Causses and the Cévennes, Mediterranean agro-pastoral Cultural Landscape

This 302,319 ha property, in the southern part of central France, is a mountain landscape interspersed by deep valleys that is representative of the relationship between agro-pastoral systems and their biophysical environment, notably through drailles or drove roads. Villages and substantial stone farmhouses on deep terraces of the Causses reflect the organization of large abbeys from the 11th century. Mont Lozère, inside the property, is one of the last places where summer transhumance is still practiced in the traditional way, using the drailles.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The upland landscapes of the Causses have been shaped by agro-pastoralism over three millennia. In the Middle Ages, the development of cities in the surrounding Mediterranean plains, and especially the growth of religious institutions, prompted the evolution of a land structure based on agro-pastoralism, the basis of which is still in place today. Too poor to host cities, too rich to be abandoned, the landscape of Causses and Cévennes are the result of the modification of the natural environment by agro-pastoral systems over a millennium. The Causses and Cévennes demonstrate almost every type of pastoral organisation to be found around the Mediterranean (agro-pastoralism, silvi-pastoralism, transhumance and sedentary pastoralism). The area has by a remarkable vitality as a result of active renewal of the agri-pastoral systems. This area is a major and viable example of Mediterranean agro-pastoralism. Its preservation is necessary to deal with threats from environmental, economic and social issues that such cultural landscapes are facing globally. The Causses and the Cévennes retain numerous testimonies of the evolution over several centuries of its pastoral societies. Their important built heritage, landscape characteristics and intangible associations that reflect traditional pastoralism will be sustained by a contemporary revival of agro-pastoralism.

Criterion (iii): The Causses and the Cévennes, manifest an outstanding example of one type of Mediterranean agro-pastoralism. This cultural tradition, based on distinctive socialstructures and local breeds of sheep, is reflected in the structure of the landscape, especially the patterns of farms, settlements, fields, water management, drailles and open grazed common land and what it reveals of the way this has evolved, in particular since the 12th century.The agro-pastoral tradition is still living and has been revitalisedin recent decades.

Criterion (v): The Causses and the Cévennes can be seen as an exemplar of Mediterranean agropastoralism and specifically to represent a response common to the south-west of Europe. The landscape areas manifest exceptional responses to the way the system has developed over time and particularly over the past millennia.

Integrity

The wholeness or intactness of the cultural landscape is related to the survival of the forces that shaped the landscape as well as to the symptoms that those forces produced. The aim is to maintain these through the perpetuation of traditional activities and the support of those activities through Park staff and external grants. In many places the landscape is almost relict -particularly the terraces in the Cévennes, where only a fraction are actively managed. In some place, the systems of transhumance along drove roads barely survives - only a few flocks make the long journeys each year and many of the tracks are beginning to be covered with scrub. However there is now increasing attention being paid to supporting and reviving these processes. The water systems that once were the lifeblood of the fields and bergeries are now only maintained in places.

Authenticity

The key structures of the landscape: buildings, terraces, walls and watercourses retain a high degree of authenticity in terms of their built fabric, but many particularly the terraces need conservation. Less of these are now within the nominated area of the Cévennes. As for the authenticity of the agro-pastoral processes that shaped the landscape, these processes are surviving, and although vulnerable and in the hands of very fewfarmers (no more than 100), they are subject to a renaissance thanks to the combined action of local and national authorities and local communities.

Protection and management requirements

The whole of the areas is protected either for natural or cultural heritage but only the core of the Cévennes National Park is protected for both. The totality of the nominated area is protected in a variety of different forms, but only part is protected for cultural attributes. The Parc national des Cévennes (PNC), with its headquarters at Florac, is a public national administrative body (établissement public national à caractère administratif) created in September 1970 under the provisions of the Law of 22 July 1960. There are 117 communes within its 321,380ha. It has been a biosphere reserve as part of the UNESCO Man and the Biosphere programme since 1985. In the core area of the park, cultural property is protected and no new building is allowed. The Parc naturel régional des Grands Causses (PNR) was founded in 1995 under the provisions of the Law of 5 July 1972 which established the category of Regional Natural Parks. At 315,949ha and covering 94 communes it is almost as large as the PNC. Its status and powers are broadly comparable with those of a national park. Its policies are determined by a Syndicat de collectivités, a public body which brings together communes and other entities with the objective of carrying out works and providing services for the communities involved. The Centre permanent d'initiatives pour l'Environnement des Causses méridionaux (CPIE), set up in accordance with 1901 legislation and representing 28 communes in the Départements of Gard and Hérault, is a body which enables these collectives to prepare and implement policies and activities of common interest. The Gorges du Tarn and de la Jonte, which extend over some 29,000ha, were classified as protected sites on 29 March 2002, as a result of which any proposed changes in their condition or character must be approved by the relevant Minister or by the Prefect of Aveyron. In addition, a large number of historic buildings and architectural ensembles are protected under the provisions of the 1913 historic monuments legislation. A number of architectural groups and small villages are designated as Zones de protection du patrimoine architectural, urbain et paysager (ZPPAUP). There is a need for tighter protection for the overall landscape to protect cultural attributes in response to identified threats and a range of complementary measures to coordinate and strengthen existing protection will be put in place by 2015.

The property has a Management Plan supported by the key stakeholders. There is huge involvement and support of the local farming communities in sustaining the agro-pastoral landscape. A Strategy for 2007-2013 addresses key themes related to improving and sharing knowledge, promoting an understanding of the living landscape and encouraging the participation of all the key players. The Strategy includes completing an atlas of the landscape, drawing up an inventory of attributes of the landscape; developing knowledge of the landscape; acquiring a common language for the landscape; developing a decision-making tool for the restoration and the management of the landscapes; and identifying emblematic sites of the cultural landscape. Implementation of the Strategy is urgently needed to underpin the whole rationale for identification, protection and management of the agro-pastoral landscape.

Links
Instagram page

Twitter account

Facebook page

Les Causses et les Cévennes, paysage culturel de l'agro-pastoralisme

Activities 2
Cultural Landscapes
Global Strategy: Support to agro-pastoral cultural landscapes
News  1
Four new sites inscribed on UNESCO's World Heritage List
28 June 2011
Events  3
5th Thematic Expert Meeting on Cultural Landscapes of Mediterranean Agropastoralism
17 Oct 2017 - 20 Oct 2017
International Meeting on the Cultural Landscapes of Agropastoralism
1 Oct 2012 - 5 Oct 2012
Week-long meeting on the cultural landscape of agro-pastoralism
1 Oct 2012 - 5 Oct 2012
France
Date of Inscription: 2011
Criteria: (iii)(v)
Property : 302,319 ha

Buffer zone: 312,425 ha
Dossier: 1153rev
N44 13 13.00 E3 28 23.00
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

Protections
by other conservation instruments

2 protections / 2 elements

2003 Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage (1 element)

Transhumance, the seasonal droving of livestock
Biosphere Reserves (1 element)

Cévennes

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026