World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Historic Centre of Vienna
Historic Centre of Vienna
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Historic Centre of Vienna

Vienna developed from early Celtic and Roman settlements into a Medieval and Baroque city, the capital of the Austro-Hungarian Empire. It played an essential role as a leading European music centre, from the great age of Viennese Classicism through the early part of the 20th century. The historic centre of Vienna is rich in architectural ensembles, including Baroque castles and gardens, as well as the late-19th-century Ringstrasse lined with grand buildings, monuments and parks.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Vienna, situated on the Danube River in the eastern part of Austria, developed from early Celtic and Roman settlements into a medieval and Baroque city, eventually becoming the capital of the Austro-Hungarian Empire. It played an essential role as the leading European music centre, hosting major personalities in the development of music from the 16th to the 20th centuries, particularly Viennese Classicism and Romanticism, consolidating Vienna’s reputation as the ‘musical capital’ of Europe. Vienna is also rich in architectural ensembles, particularly Baroque mansions and gardens as well as the late 19th-century Ringstrasse ensemble lined with grand buildings, monuments, and parks. The property consists of the city’s medieval core (based on the Roman settlement), the principal Baroque ensembles with their axial layouts, and the Gründerzeit constructions from the beginning of the modern period.

At the beginning of the 12th century the settlement here expanded beyond the Roman defences, which were demolished. During the Ottoman conflicts in the 16th and 17th centuries, the medieval town’s walls, which surrounded a much larger area, were rebuilt and provided with bastions. This remained the core of Vienna until the medieval walls were demolished in the second half of the 19th century. The inner city contains a number of medieval-era buildings, including the Schottenkloster, the oldest monastery in Austria, the churches of Maria am Gestade (one of the main Gothic structures), Michaelerkirche, Minoritenkirche and Minoritenkloster from the 13th century, and St Stephen’s Cathedral, which dates from the 14th and 15th centuries. The same period also saw the construction of civic ensembles, such as initial parts of the Hofburg Palace. Whereas the monastic complexes were generally built of stone, becoming part of the defences of the medieval city, the residential quarters were of timber and suffered frequent fires.

In 1683, Vienna became the capital of the Habsburg Empire and developed rapidly, becoming an impressive Baroque city. The Baroque character was expressed particularly in the large palace layouts such as the Belvedere Palace and garden ensemble. A growing number of new palaces were built by noble families, many existing medieval buildings, churches, and convents were altered and given Baroque features, and additions were made to representative administrative buildings. Several historic Viennese buildings are now associated with the residences of important personalities such as Mozart, Beethoven, and Schubert, when the city played an essential role as a leading European centre for music.

A new phase in the history of Vienna took place when its 34 suburbs were incorporated into the city and the emperor ordered the demolition of the fortifications around the inner city. The opportunity was taken to create one of the most significant 19th-century ensembles in the history of urban planning, which greatly influenced the rest of Europe in this crucial period of social and economic development. In 1874, the Hofburg complex was extended with the addition of the Neue Hofburg, an ‘Imperial Forum’, and joined with large museum complexes into a single ensemble. The Burgtheater, parliament, town hall, and university formed another ensemble linked with these structures. To this was added the opera house as well as a large number of public and private buildings along the Ringstrasse, on the line of the demolished city walls. The late 19th and early 20th centuries testify to further creative contributions by Viennese designers, artists, and architects in the periods of the Jugendstil (Art Nouveau), the Secession, and the early Modern Movement in architecture. 

Criterion (ii): The urban and architectural qualities of the Historic Centre of Vienna bear outstanding witness to a continuing interchange of values throughout the second millennium. 

Criterion (iv): Three key periods of European cultural and political development – the Middle Ages, the Baroque period, and the Gründerzeit – are exceptionally well illustrated by the urban and architectural heritage of the Historic Centre of Vienna. 

Criterion (vi): Since the 16th century Vienna has been universally acknowledged to be the musical capital of Europe. 

Integrity

Within the boundaries of the 371 ha Historic Centre of Vienna are located all the attributes that sustain its Outstanding Universal Value, including its architectural and urban qualities and layout, and that illustrate its three major phases of development – medieval, Baroque, and the Gründerzeit – that symbolize Austrian and central European history. The Historic Centre of Vienna has also maintained its characteristic skyline. The 462 ha buffer zone protects the immediate setting of the inscribed property. 

Authenticity

The property is substantially authentic in terms of its location, its forms and designs, and its substance and materials. This authenticity resides largely in the overlapping and multi-layered interweaving of urban buildings, structures, and spaces. The property has to a remarkable degree retained the architectural elements that demonstrate its continuous interchange of values through authentic examples from the above-mentioned three key periods of European cultural and political development. In addition to the architectural elements, the Historic Centre of Vienna has retained its role as the music capital of Europe.

The historic urban fabric of the Historic Centre of Vienna is thus informed by this ongoing interchange, which has caused the urban landscape to evolve and grow over time, reflected in the new, emerging skyline outside the buffer zone. Vienna’s continuing development requires a very sensitive approach that takes into account the attributes that sustain the Outstanding Universal Value of the property, including its visual qualities, particularly regarding new high-rise constructions. 

Protection and management requirements

About 75% of the property is in private ownership, 18% is publicly owned, and 7% is owned by the Roman Catholic Church. Various legal instruments at both federal and municipal/provincial levels protect the Historic Centre of Vienna and its buffer zone. These include the Federal Monument Protection Act (Federal Law Gazette No. 533/1923, the most recent amendment entering into force on 1 January 2000), and the municipal Building Code, with its Amendment on Old Town Conservation (Vienna Law Gazette No. 16/1972). Parts of Vienna fall under the regulations of the Vienna Nature Conservation Act (from 1998). Other legal instruments, such as the Garages Act and the Tree Preservation Act, are also relevant.

In addition to these regulations, the Province of Vienna has adopted a Land Use Plan and Urban Development Plans as planning instruments. The Land Use Plan, which on a scale of 1:2000 is a more precise version of the Urban Development Plan, divides the metropolitan area into green zones, development zones, and infrastructure zones. The Urban Development Plan lays down the spatial dimensions of the protection zones as defined under the Vienna Old Town Conservation Act. The Management Plan, which was elaborated in 2002, refers to the two World Heritage properties in Vienna (Historic Centre of Vienna, and Palace and Gardens of Schönbrunn). The plan fulfils objectives related to formalizing the procedures for the legal protection of cultural properties, and to defining the urban administrative structures for cultural assets as well as the necessary measures for the preservation of the cultural heritage (heritage which has to meet the requirements of ‘authenticity’, design, material, and artisanship).

Sustaining the attributes that support the Outstanding Universal Value, authenticity, and integrity of the property over time will require addressing the challenges related to development pressures, visual impacts, and modernization of the historic fabric that arise within the context of urban development in a prosperous capital city. Such challenges led to the adoption in 2005 of the internationally recognised “Vienna Memorandum” on managing historic urban landscapes. Since then, planning authorities in Vienna have paid particular attention to new, sustainable, appropriate conservation policies. As a result, the Urban Development Plan was revised in line with the stipulations of the Memorandum. Efforts must be continued to ensure the coherence of new developments with the Outstanding Universal Value of the Historic Centre of Vienna, especially of high-rise buildings outside the buffer zone.

Links
Weltkulturerbe Wien

 View photos from OUR PLACE the World Heritage collection

City of Vienna, (Vienna Tourist Board)

Activities 1
World Heritage Cities Programme
News  6
Historic Centre of Vienna inscribed on List of World Heritage in Danger
6 July 2017
State of Conservation of the World Heritage Property “Historic Centre of Vienna”
21 June 2016
State of Conservation of the Historic Centre of Vienna (Austria)
11 June 2015
World Heritage sites participate in Earth Hour
28 March 2012
More add
Media
play_arrow Historic Centre of Vienna (UNESCO/NHK)
play_arrow Historic Centre of Vienna (UNESCO/NHK)
Austria
Date of Inscription: 2001
Criteria: (ii)(iv)(vi)
Property : 371 ha

Buffer zone: 462 ha
Dossier: 1033
Vienna
N48 12 33.84 E16 22 11.64
List of World Heritage in Danger

Inscription Year on the List of World Heritage in Danger

2017 - Present
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2025 2024 2023 2021 2019 2018 2017 2016 2015 2013 2011 2010 2009 2008 2004 2003 2002
Protections
by other conservation instruments

1 protection / 2 elements

2003 Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage (2 elements)

Classical horsemanship and the High School of the Spanish Riding School Vienna
Craft techniques and customary practices of cathedral workshops, or Bauhütten, in Europe, know-how, transmission, development of knowledge and innovation

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026