World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Sacred Ensembles of the Hoysalas
Sacred Ensembles of the Hoysalas
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Sacred Ensembles of the Hoysalas
This serial property encompasses the three most representative examples of Hoysala-style temple complexes in southern India, dating from the 12th to 13th centuries. The Hoysala style was created through careful selection of contemporary temple features and those from the past to create a different identity from neighbouring kingdoms. The shrines are characterized by hyper-real sculptures and stone carvings that cover the entire architectural surface, a circumambulatory platform, a large-scale sculptural gallery, a multi-tiered frieze, and sculptures of the Sala legend. The excellence of the sculptural art underpins the artistic achievement of these temple complexes, which represent a significant stage in the historical development of Hindu temple architecture.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The Sacred Ensembles of the Hoysalas is a serial property comprised of the three most representative Hoysala-style temple complexes constructed between the 12th and 13th centuries in the present State of Karnataka, namely the Channakeshava Temple in Belur, the Hoysalesvara Temple in Halebidu, and the Keshava Temple in Somanathapura.

Through the careful selection of temple features from the past kingdoms and their integration with those of contemporary temples in southern India, the architects and artists created a new style of temple and, through that process, helped forge a distinct identity for the Hoysala kingdom. The Hoysala-style is a combination of several features, including a stellate sanctum, a circumambulatory platform following the shape of the sanctum, a multi-tiered frieze, a thematically arranged sculptural gallery of religious, epic, and other stories along the circumambulatory platform, extensive sculptures and stone carvings that cover the entire exterior surface, and sculptures of the legend of Sala killing a tiger serving as the quintessence of the temples. This style successfully set the Hoysala temples apart from those of other contemporary kingdoms and dynasties.

The numerous signatures left by the artists who created these Hoysala-style temples – an unusual practice in the Indian subcontinent – points to their high degree of artistic agency and the prestigious standing they enjoyed in Hoysala society.

Criterion (i): The creation of the Hoysala style of temple architecture and the artistic achievement of the sculptural art of the temple complexes are exceptional testimonies to the outstanding creativity and inventive genius of the Hoysala people, as expressed in the combination of the stellate temple plan with a platform, frieze, thematic arrangement of the sculptures along the circumambulation, and profusion of hyper-real sculptures over the entire architectural surface.

Criterion (ii): The Hoysala-style temple form, motivated by the need for establishing a distinct identity, was the successful outcome of the interchange of human values that developed as the result of creative modifications of the plans and elements of the temple architecture prevalent elsewhere, complemented with original innovations. It emerged from the considered and informed choices of elements and features found in other parts of the Indian subcontinent, selected in very conscious ways with a clear understanding of the desired outcome. The Hoysala-style, as demonstrated by the property, exerted a lasting influence on later temple construction in the region and beyond.

Criterion (iv): The Sacred Ensembles of the Hoysalas are an exceptional testimony to the Hoysala-style temples, which illustrate a significant stage in the historical development of Hindu temple architecture. It is an exceptional physical testimony to the diversity of religious architecture in India.

Integrity

The Sacred Ensembles of the Hoysalas contains all the attributes necessary to convey its Outstanding Universal Value while all the supporting and functionally linked elements are included in the buffer zone. The chronological integrity of the whole series is well demonstrated by the component parts, which cover the most significant periods of Hoysala-style temple construction from its initial phase to its high point. The sculptural and structural variations in the three temple complexes complement each other, collectively illustrating the wholeness and richness of the Hoysala-style. While the integrity of some component parts has been affected by past alterations, such as the demolition of the superstructures of the Channakeshava and Hoysalesvara temples and the loss of the Hoysalesvara Temple’s enclosure walls, the key features that represent the Hoysala-style remain unimpaired. All the attributes conveying the Outstanding Universal Values are legally protected, with major pressures on them controlled. Channakeshava Temple (Belur) is a living temple and the buffer zone contextualises the area where the community is still engaged with temple rituals and activities. It would benefit from some improvement regarding the historical remains and significant views. In Halebidu, the buffer zone of Hoysalesvara Temple includes the wider setting of the tank and other nationally protected monuments. In Somanathapura, the wider setting around Keshava Temple enhances the protection of the property.

Authenticity

The attributes that convey the Outstanding Universal Value for the Sacred Ensembles of the Hoysalas have a high degree of authenticity, both collectively and for each individual component part, and represent the most significant temples of the Hoysala cultural era. The locations, forms, materials, uses, traditions, spirit, and feeling of the property are mostly intact. The key attributes that define the Hoysala style – including the plans and forms of the various structures, the exterior and interior decorations, the sculptures, stone carvings, and friezes – have a high level of authenticity. While several changes over the centuries have affected the property, such as the loss of religious activities at the Hoysalesvara Temple in Halebidu and Keshava Temple in Somanathapura, the property meets the conditions of authenticity. A continuity of worship, rituals and festivals is to be noticed at Channakeshava Temple (Belur), since its inception in 1117 CE. The three component parts are built with chloritic schist and reflect the features such as stellate plans, horizontal friezes of the adhisthana, artists' signatures, sculptural panels and carvings that became the hallmark of this period.

Protection and management requirements

The three component parts of the Sacred Ensembles of the Hoysalas are all protected monuments under the Ancient and Historical Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958 (Amendment and Validation 2010) and other national and state laws. The component parts and the buffer zones are regulated by the provisions made in the 2010 amendment of this Act.

Overall management of the property is undertaken by the Apex Committee, which is chaired by the Chief Secretary of the Government of Karnataka and supported by the Director General, the Additional Director General of the Archaeological Survey of India, the Regional Director, and the Regional Commissioner, as well as the heads of relevant departments under the Government of Karnataka. The Apex Committee monitors and reviews management issues and policies, coordinates and implements the site management plan, reviews conservation interventions, and secures relevant funds. A nodal officer has been appointed to coordinate and implement the decisions of the Apex Committee. Under the Apex Committee are the district-level committees established to manage the buffer zones: the Hassan District Committee for Channakeshava Temple and Hoysalesvara Temple; and the Mysuru District Committee for Keshava Temple.

The three component parts are owned and managed by the Archaeological Survey of India, while the buffer zones are jointly managed by the National Monument Authority, the Department of Archaeology, Museums and Heritage, the Government of Karnataka with its relevant departments, local authorities, and private owners. The religious activities at Channakeshava Temple are managed by the Karnataka Hindu Religious Institutions and Charitable Endowments Department of the Government of Karnataka.

The management system is guided by the site management plan, which sets out the vision and lays out six objectives in terms of monument conservation; guidelines and policies for development; continuity of artistic and cultural tradition; sustainable tourism management; cultural, environmental, mobility and social impact assessment; and education, outreach and awareness. A set of strategies with associated regulations is stipulated, and there is an action plan for achieving the vision and objectives. Heritage Impact Assessment and risk preparedness mechanisms are in place. The involvement of the community for the conservation and management of the property should be encouraged, and a holistic interpretation plan and tourists’ amenities should be developed and implemented.

India
Date of Inscription: 2023
Criteria: (i)(ii)(iv)
Property : 10.47 ha

Buffer zone: 195.87 ha
Dossier: 1670
Serial: yes

Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2025
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026