World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
The Emergence of Modern Human Behaviour: The ...
The Emergence of Modern Human Behaviour: The Pleistocene Occupation Sites of South Africa
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Assistance
The Emergence of Modern Human Behaviour: The Pleistocene Occupation Sites of South Africa

This serial property contributes to the understanding of the origin of behaviourally modern humans, their cognitive abilities and cultures, and the climatic transitions that they survived. It is composed of three dispersed archaeological sites, Diepkloof Rock Shelter, Pinnacle Point Site Complex, and Sibhudu Cave, located in the Western Cape and KwaZulu-Natal provinces of South Africa. These sites provide the most varied and best-preserved record known of the development of modern human behaviour, reaching back as far as 162,000 years. Symbolic thought and advanced technologies are exemplified by evidence of ochre processing, engraved patterns, decorative beads, decorated eggshells, advanced projectile weapons and techniques for toolmaking, and microliths.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Diepkloof Rock Shelter, Pinnacle Point Site Complex, and Sibhudu Cave are three widely dispersed archaeological sites located in the Western Cape and KwaZulu-Natal provinces of South Africa. Two of them, Sibhudu Cave and Diepkloof Rock Shelter, are located about ten kilometres from the current shoreline, while the Pinnacle Point Site Complex is located directly on the coast. These sites provide the most varied and best-preserved record known of the development of modern human behaviour, reaching back as far as 162,000 years. Symbolic thought and advanced technologies are exemplified by evidence of ochre processing, engraved patterns on ochre and bone, estuarine shellfish beads for body decoration, decorated ostrich eggshells, lithic technologies for advanced projectile weapons, heat treatment of stone for toolmaking, and microliths. This serial property contributes to the understanding of the origin of behaviourally modern humans, their cognitive abilities and cultures, and the climatic transitions that they survived.

Criterion (iii): The archaeological layers at the Diepkloof Rock Shelter, Pinnacle Point Site Complex, and Sibhudu Cave provide exceptional evidence of behavioural and palaeoenvironmental developments in the Middle Stone Age. They contain early evidence of symbolic thought and advanced technologies. The great variety of materials, the early dates, and the excellent state of conservation make the evidence of this important step in human development exceptional.

Criterion (iv): Diepkloof Rock Shelter, Pinnacle Point Site Complex, and Sibhudu Cave preserve exceptionally well-stratified and well-dated sedimentary records of ancient human life dating from about 162,000 to 38,000 years ago. The development of modern human behaviour and complex cognition are illustrated by the evidence of abstract thinking, the ability to plan and strategize, and technological innovation, including, for example, the preparation and use of adhesives and the heat treatment of lithic materials.

Criterion (v): Diepkloof Rock Shelter, Pinnacle Point Site Complex, and Sibhudu Cave offer some of the most important evidence known for the consistent exploitation of coastal resources during the Middle and Late Pleistocene. As current sea levels rise due to climate change, much of the ancient record of human coastal resource use has been obliterated or is in grave danger. As such, the excellent state of conservation of these rare sites is pivotal for preserving evidence of palaeoclimates and palaeoenvironments.

Integrity

The property includes all the attributes necessary to express its Outstanding Universal Value, and is of adequate size to ensure the complete representation of the features that convey its significance. All three component parts contain long stratigraphic sequences of human occupation that together cover a time span of about 124,000 years, from 162,000 to 38,000 years ago. Preservation conditions, even for organic material at the Sibhudu Cave, are very good. Favourable depositional processes have allowed the steady accumulation of archaeologically significant deposits with little or no loss due to natural erosion or human or animal activities. The views from the sites are generally undisturbed. Archaeological excavations have been conducted according to the highest international standards. All remains have been carefully curated and catalogued in national collections, and their significance and the interpretations based upon them have been reported and published in international journals.

Authenticity

The cultural values of the property are truthfully and credibly expressed through its attributes. The stratigraphic sequences and the dating of the different deposits, as excavated and documented by several international multidisciplinary teams of experts and peer reviewed at the time of publication, confirm the authenticity of the archaeological contexts and remains that constitute evidence of modern human behaviour.

Protection and management requirements

Legal protection of the property is based principally on the World Heritage Convention Act, No. 49 of 1999, and the National Heritage Resources Act, No. 25 of 1999, which protect the three component parts and provide for a system of Heritage Impact Assessment. The National Environmental Management Act, No. 107 of 1998, also includes a system of impact assessment.

The management of the Western Cape component parts is coordinated and hosted at the provincial level by the Member (minister) of the Executive Council of Cultural Affairs and Sport, and the management of the KwaZulu-Natal component part is coordinated and hosted by the KwaZulu-Natal Amafa and Research Institute. The two authorities will jointly serve as the overall Management Authority through the establishment of a Joint Management Committee. Each component part will have a Site Management Committee based in the local context. The World Heritage Convention Committee of South Africa advises on issues related to properties inscribed on the World Heritage List. Integrated Conservation Management Plans have been developed, as is required under the World Heritage Convention Act of the State Party. Stakeholders and the local communities are well integrated in the management process. The component parts are privately owned, which makes the formalisation of relationships with the legal owners through heritage agreements an important step to be completed as soon as possible.

News  2
A major step forward in the protection of African World Heritage
7 August 2024
UNESCO World Heritage: 24 new sites inscribed
1 August 2024
South Africa
Date of Inscription: 2024
Criteria: (iii)(iv)(v)
Property : 57.4 ha

Buffer zone: 965.5 ha
Dossier: 1723
Serial: yes

Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

Protections
by other conservation instruments

2 protections / 2 elements

Biosphere Reserves (1 element)

Gouritz Cluster
RAMSAR (1 element)

Verlorenvlei

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026