World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Kaeng Krachan Forest Complex
Kaeng Krachan Forest Complex
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Kaeng Krachan Forest Complex

The site is located along the Thailand side of the Tenasserim mountain range, part of a north-south granite and limestone mountain ridge running down the Malay Peninsula. Located at the cross-roads between the Himalayan, Indochina, and Sumatran faunal and floral realms, the property is home to rich biodiversity. It is dominated by semi-evergreen/dry evergreen and moist evergreen forest with some mixed deciduous forest, montane forest, and deciduous dipterocarp forest. A number of endemic and globally endangered plant and wildlife species have been reported in the property, which overlaps with two Important Bird Areas (IBAs) and is noted for its rich diversity of birdlife, including eight globally endangered fauna species. The property is home to the critically endangered Siamese Crocodile (Crocodylus siamensis), the endangered Asiatic Wild Dog (Cuon alpinus), Banteng (Bos javanicus), Asian Elephant (Elephas maximus), Yellow/Elongated Tortoise (Indotestudo elongata), and the endangered Asian Giant Tortoise (Manouria emys), as well as several other vulnerable species of birds and mammals. Remarkably, it is also home to eight cat species: the endangered tiger (Panthera tigris) and Fishing Cat (Prionailurus viverrinus), the near-threatened Leopard (Panthera pardus) and Asian Golden Cat (Catopuma temminckii), the vulnerable Clouded Leopard (Neofelis nebulosi) and Marbled Cat (Pardofelis marmorata), and the least concerned Jungle Cat (Felis chaus) and Leopard Cat (Prionailurus bengalensis).

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The Kaeng Krachan Forest Complex (KKFC) lies in the Tenasserim Range near the border area of Thailand and Myanmar. The Forest complex covers vast forest areas stretching across parts of three provinces in the western part of Thailand: namely Ratchaburi, Phetchaburi, and Prachuap Khiri Khan, and encompasses, almost entirely, three national parks and one wildlife sanctuary. Located in the Indo-Malayan ecoregion, the property has a total area of nearly 409,000 ha. The area’s topography is rugged with high mountains in the west and rolling hills to the east and elevation ranges between 37 and 1,231 meters above sea level. The climate is influenced by the north-eastern and south-western monsoon winds. At the macro-scale, KKFC boasts a rich and varied biological diversity resulting from the confluence of four zoogeographical sub-regions (Sundaic, Sino-Himalayan, Indochinese and Indo-Burmese) and four floristic provinces (Indo-Burmese or Himalayan, Indo-Malaysian, Annamatic, and Andamanese). The KKFC maintains significant populations of key globally significant species including the presence of endemic and endangered species. The property is also a priority site for the Indo-Burma biodiversity hotspot providing crucial areas for tiger and elephant conservation and protects a number of important bird habitats.

Criterion (x): KKFC hosts a remarkable range of mammals, birds and reptiles from this region and is considered as one of the top 500 most irreplaceable protected areas in the world for the conservation of mammal, bird and amphibian species. The property is characterised by six forest types, dominated by semi-evergreen, dry evergreen and moist evergreen forests and complemented by mixed deciduous forest, montane forest, and deciduous dipterocarp forest. The property represents a meeting point of several zoogeographical realms and floristic provinces being the northernmost point for many species from the south and conversely the southernmost point for species from the north. In addition to this macro scale diversity, the diverse geological characteristics and highly variable topography contribute to an exceptionally high habitat diversity at the micro scale. The property’s rich biodiversity is demonstrated by the presence of at least 459 known wild animal species, as well as by 81 rare species, and 48 endemic species.

The property is home to a large number of threatened and rare plant species, some of which are extinct elsewhere. Prunus kaengkrachanensis stands out as a rosaceous plant species discovered in 2015 and endemic to KKFC. Further critical species include Champi Doi (Magnolia gustavii), and Agarwood (Aquilaria malaccensis) and Kamettia chandeei of the dogbane family. The species Geostachys smitinandii of the ginger family is found only in the KKFC and the Dong Phayayen – Khao Yai Forest Complex Natural World Heritage site of Thailand. The property is also the world’s only home to the plant species Trichosanthes phonsenae from the cucumber family first discovered in 2003.

KKFC also maintains healthy populations of globally important and threatened wildlife species. A complete suite of top carnivores has been identified in the area, including eight species of Felidae (cat species), including tiger (Panthera tigris). The property stands out as one of the last few places where the Siamese crocodile (Crocodylus siamensis) is still present in the wild. It is home to the Sunda Pangolin (Manis javanica), Elongated Tortoise (Indotestudo elongata), Asian Giant Tortoise (Manouria emys) as well as Banteng (Bos javanicus), Asian Elephant (Elephas maximus), Dhole (Cuon alpinus), Asian Black Bear (Ursus thibetanus), Malay tapir (Tapirus indicus), Mainland Serow (Capricornis sumatraensis), Gaur (Bos gaurus) and Stump-tailed Macaque (Macaca arctoides).

Integrity

The nearly 409,000 ha property in Thailand is contiguous with a large forest area in neighbouring Myanmar, including the Taninthaya Forest Complex and the Tenasserim Ranges act as a natural border between the two countries. This connectivity context adds to the property’s integrity and offers scope for transboundary and corridor conservation opportunities across a much larger intact forest landscape. The KKFC also protects the head watersheds of many important rivers such as Phetchaburi, Kui Buri, Pranburi, Phachi, and Mae Klong Rivers. Some of these rivers provide water to the Ramsar Site of Sam Roi Yod National Park, which is one of Thailand’s best-known areas for water birds.

KKFC includes six forest types, which cover more than 96% of the property’s area. Dry evergreen forest covers a majority of the area, about 65%. The forest systems of the inscribed area remain intact and in good condition, providing suitable habitats for a remarkably diverse fauna and flora.

Protection and management requirements

The four protected areas comprising the KKFC are strictly protected under relevant legislation. The protected areas include a wildlife sanctuary (Mae Nam Phachi) protected under the Wildlife Protection and Preservation Act B.E.2562 (2019), and three national parks (Chaloem Phrakiat Thai Prachan, Kaeng Krachan and Kui Buri) protected under the National Park Act B.E. 2562 (2019). The Kaeng Krachan and Kui Buri National Parks are connected by Kui Buri Forest Reserve and an Army Reserve Zone. This corridor is also regarded as a protected area under the Forest Reserve Act B.E. 2507 (1964) and the Military Reserve Zone Act B.E. 2478 (1935). The main purpose of the protected area designations is to safeguard and preserve the overall ecological integrity of the area, including the outstanding wildlife and species values and forested watersheds for Phetchaburi and Prachuap Khiri Khan provinces. The protected area administration consists of a Superintendent Unit with one or more deputies for each component as well as patrol stations located in and around the boundaries.

The National Park Act and Wildlife Conservation and Protection Act, both adopted in 2019, intend to strike a balance between natural conservation and sustainable utilization of resources. The Acts aim to legally permit local communities to reside in the property’s protected areas while also being able to make use of forest products for their sustainable livelihoods. Moreover, the legislations shall promote the participation of local communities in important decision-making processes related to the KKFC, including protected area management plan, land tenure survey, and legal mechanisms to enhance understanding between the local communities and Thai Government officials concerning land use. Effective and inclusive participation of local communities and indigenous peoples will be essential to build positive relationships that support sustainable livelihoods and participatory management approaches to safeguard Outstanding Universal Value.

Patrols cover about half of KKFC, concentrating on high biodiversity areas and areas of vulnerability to threats. Less accessible areas are patrolled from the air with targeted drop-in patrols as well as foot patrols.

News  1
Four natural and three cultural sites added to UNESCO’s World Heritage List
26 July 2021
Thailand
Date of Inscription: 2021
Criteria: (x)
Property : 408,940 ha

Dossier: 1461rev
N12 51 56.4 E99 24 0.6
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2025 2023
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026