World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Bale Mountains National Park
Bale Mountains National Park
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Assistance
Bale Mountains National Park
This property protects a landscape mosaic of extraordinary beauty that is shaped by the combined forces of ancient lava outpourings, glaciation and the dissection by the Great Rift Valley. It features volcanic peaks and ridges, dramatic escarpments, sweeping valleys, glacial lakes, lush forests, deep gorges and numerous waterfalls, creating exceptional natural beauty. The property harbours diverse and unique biodiversity at ecosystem, species and genetic levels, and five major rivers originate within the Park, estimated to supply water and support the livelihoods of millions of people in and beyond Ethiopia.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Bale Mountains National Park (BMNP) boasts a spectacularly diverse landscape mosaic comprised of distinct ecosystems and habitats and associated biodiversity. The property covers an area of 215,000 hectares in the heart of the Bale-Arsi Massif in the south-eastern Ethiopian Highlands in Oromia National Regional State. Building upon much earlier efforts, the National Park has been legally protected and demarcated since 2014. The property includes the Africa’s largest area of afro-alpine habitat above 3,000 m above sea level (a.s.l.) with numerous glacial lakes, wetlands and moorlands. Volcanic ridges and peaks tower above the plateau, most prominently Tullu Dimtu, Ethiopia’s second highest peak at 4,377 m a.s.l. Elsewhere in the park, extensive grasslands thrive next to various types of forests including tree heath, bamboo and juniper forests. Significantly, the southern slopes of the Bale Mountains descend dramatically into the famous Harenna Forest, the second largest moist tropical forest in Ethiopia, including patches of cloud forest.

As the origin of several important rivers, the ecosystems and habitats within BMNP and its surroundings regulate the supply of water for millions of people in and beyond Ethiopia. The park and its surroundings are home to an extraordinary fauna and flora with an exceptional degree of endemism and in several cases the only remaining populations of globally threatened species across numerous taxonomic groups. For example, Mountain Nyala and Bale Monkey are both endemic to this area, along with numerous endemic rodents and amphibians, as well as the most important remaining population of Ethiopian Wolf. It is important to understand, however, that at the time of inscription, the property’s exceptional conservation values coincide with very high pressure on the ecosystems. Despite severe threats and a continuing need to better balance local livelihoods with the conservation of biodiversity and ecosystem services, longstanding conservation efforts, partnerships and the natural protection granted by the rugged terrain have maintained a favourable conservation status and outlook by the standards of the afro-alpine and East Africa’s moist tropical forests.

Criterion (vii): The property protects a landscape mosaic of extraordinary beauty that is shaped by the combined forces of ancient lava outpourings, glaciation and the dissection by the Great Rift Valley. It features volcanic peaks and ridges, dramatic escarpments, sweeping valleys, glacial lakes, lush forests, deep gorges and numerous waterfalls, creating an exceptional natural beauty. The altitudinal gradient of the park spans almost 2,900 metres from the highest peak standing at 4,377 m a.s.l. (Tullu Dimtu) down to approximately 1,500 m a.s.l. in the Harenna Forest. The altitudinal gradient not only creates vibrant changes in topography, soil, vegetation and species assemblages but constantly changing, breath-taking vistas. Amongst scattered wetlands and rocky outcrops, the iconic Giant Lobelias break the skyline above the otherwise stunted afro-alpine vegetation of the Sanetti Plateau, a harsh and aesthetically stunning high altitude environment. Unusual striations, or boulder grooves, mark the shallow hillsides, a natural phenomenon, which remains an enigma to geologists and glaciologists. Dropping from the plateau, the Harenna and the adjacent Mena Angetu form the second largest moist tropical forest in Ethiopia, transitioning in some areas into the country’s only remaining patches of cloud forest. This, combined with the plateaus, complete a unique, majestic landscape with an extraordinary natural aesthetic.

Criterion (x): The property harbours diverse and unique biodiversity at ecosystem, species and genetic levels. The Sanetti Plateau and the slopes of the Bale Mountains National Park above 3,500 m a.s.l. encompass the largest intact and contiguous expanse of afro-alpine habitat in the world further adding to the importance of the property as a rare large-scale remnant of this habitat. Uniquely, the afro-alpine of the Bale Mountains continues to be intricately linked to intact and large-scale expanses of forest, wetland and grassland ecosystems and habitats.  More than 80% of all species found in the afro-montane habitat are endemic.

Bale Mountains National Park is home to 1,660 documented species of flowering plants, 177 of which are endemic to Ethiopia and 31 exclusively to the Bale Mountains. The forests of the Bale Mountains serve as a genetic reservoir for Wild Forest Coffee and countless medicinal plant species. 79 mammal species have been recorded in the park; 23 of these are endemic, including eight rodent species. There are 363 documented bird species, including over 170 recorded migratory bird species, such as wintering and passing raptors, including the Greater Spotted Eagle. While the afro-alpine habitats are not conspicuously rich in terms of plant species, more than 80 % of all species found in this type of habitat are endemic, an extreme degree of endemism by any standard. The afro-alpine has been recognized as a globally significant place in literally all major global conservation priority-setting exercises.

At the time of inscription, the Harenna Shrew, the Giant Mole Rat, the Malcolm’s Ethiopian Toad, the Bale Mountains Tree Frog and the Bale Mountains Frog can only be found in the Bale Mountains. The property hosts an estimated two-thirds of the global population of the endemic Mountain Nyala, the most important population of the endemic Ethiopian Wolf and it is home to the Menelik’s Bushbuck, an endemic subspecies. The Bale Monkey is endemic to the Ethiopia Highlands, east of the Rift Valley and is restricted to the bamboo belt of the Bale Mountains and the Sidamo Highlands.

Integrity

Covering 215,000 hectares, the property serves as a meaningful and viable representation of afro-alpine and associated forests. The afro-alpine Sanetti Plateau is situated within the property in its entirety. At the foot of the southern escarpment lies the tropical moist Harenna Forest, one of Ethiopia’s largest natural forests, granted protection in the national law with about 100,000 hectares within BMNP and the adjacent areas. The forest cover in the park is almost continuous with a low level of fragmentation and degradation. The dense, green, misty jungle contains huge trees, moss draped branches, and impenetrable undergrowth wrapped in a tangle of creepers among which wild coffee and medicinal plants grow. Unlike most of the wider ecoregion, the land and resources protected by the national park are still in a relatively good state of conservation due to the longstanding conservation efforts, the remote location and the rugged terrain.

Nevertheless, pressures on the property’s nature conservation values at the time of inscription are related to unsustainable practices linked to increasing human settlement within and around the park, including expansion of livestock grazing and agriculture. Although localized degradation has occurred, the full array of ecosystem and habitat diversity, hosting complete native species assemblages, continues to exist. Other threats to the integrity of BMNP requiring long-term attention include the existing road crossing the park’s vulnerable key habitats. The road generates some direct disturbance and facilitates access to otherwise remote areas.

The property, with its clear, legally defined boundary, is of sufficient size to protect a large, particularly valuable and still remarkably intact example of the linked ecosystems and habitat mosaic of this area. The property has a recognized buffer zone comprising all 29 neighbouring kebeles (the smallest administrative unit in Ethiopia) surrounding the legally gazetted and demarcated park boundary as a key investment in the future integrity of the property. The buffer zone itself harbours very important conservation values, as well as securing landscape connectivity beyond the property.

Protection and management requirements

Bale Mountains National Park is managed by the Ethiopian Wildlife Conservation Authority (EWCA). EWCA is a self-governed body, created by Proclamation No. 575/2008 of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and regulated by National Law of Wildlife Development, Conservation and Utilization (Proclamation No. 541/2007). The entire surface area of the property of 215,000 hectares enjoys a high level of legal protection in line with IUCN Protected Area Category II. The national park is surrounded by an officially recognized buffer zone of 235,121 hectares, ranging between approximately 5 to 20 km from the boundaries of the park. The Oromia National Regional State acting through the local woreda (district authorities) and kebele committees are critically important partners in the management of the property and its buffer zone. Regulation 338/2014 includes the establishment of a statutory Park Advisory Committee (PAC) with representation of the park adjacent woredas. In each woreda, a Park Community Dialogue Forum (PCDF) has been established with representation from each of the park adjacent kebele. The PAC reports to the Bale Regional-Federal Coordination Committee which provides the policy direction with regard to addressing threats to the park.  

In the buffer zone, Oromia National Regional State, the local government bodies and Oromia Forest and Wildlife Enterprise (OFWE) support more integrated and landscape scale governance of the Bale eco-region through Participatory Forest Management (PFM) cooperatives, Community Conservancies (CC) and Controlled Hunting Areas (CHA) linking to the park through bodies such as the PCDF. The Governance of the buffer zone promotes sustainable natural resource use by the park adjacent communities without compromising conservation and the ecosystem services of the property.

Managed by EWCA, the park has its own park administration office with additional ranger outposts and mobile camps. Park staff includes around 80 rangers at the time of inscription. The property’s strategic and operational management is guided by a 10-year General Management Plans (GMP), which includes management programmes on Park Operations; Tourism Management; Interim Settlement & Grazing Management; Outreach and Ecological Management. In addition, a Tourism Development Plan guides the management actions to improve community benefits from tourism whilst managing the impact of visitors on the property. Threats to the property are actively being addressed through the General Management Plan’s Interim Settlement Grazing Management Programme, a Grazing Pressure Reduction Strategy and a linked Livelihood Improvement Strategy, which include measures to reduce livestock to sustainable levels and gradually expand no-grazing zones through a participatory process with relevant communities. Strict adherence to a rights-based approach and to the principle of free, prior and informed consent of the affected communities are key requirements for the management of the property.

One challenge beyond the scope of EWCA and park management has been sporadic civil unrest but the situation is improving. Nonetheless, there is progress in terms of enhancing communication and collaboration with all stakeholders and rights-holders, a crucial long-term task. Efforts are underway to improve the critically important dialogue and cooperation with local communities, resource users and all levels of government. Mechanisms are emerging to more effectively incorporate park protection into local development strategies with an emphasis on addressing the issues of settlement and livestock grazing in the park, while fully taking into account local needs.

News  1
2023: A new important step in the protection and promotion of Africa's World Heritage
9 October 2023
Ethiopia
Date of Inscription: 2023
Criteria: (vii)(x)
Property : 215,000 ha

Buffer zone: 235,121 ha
Dossier: 111rev
N6 47 52 E39 44 56
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026