World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Cambodian Memorial Sites: From centres of ...
Cambodian Memorial Sites: From centres of repression to places of peace and reflection
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Cambodian Memorial Sites: From centres of repression to places of peace and reflection

The property consists of three locations that reflect the human rights abuses of the Khmer Rouge regime in Cambodia from 1971 to 1979. The three component parts represent the widespread violence during this period: the former M-13 prison (early repression), the Tuol Sleng Genocide Museum (former S-21 prison), and the Choeung Ek Genocidal Center (former execution site of S-21). These places have been preserved and memorialized since the regime’s fall. The Tuol Sleng Museum maintains extensive archives and collections related to this period, mainly documented by the Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia (ECCC).

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The Cambodian Memorial Sites are testimony to one of the most serious abuses of human rights in the 20th century. Between 1971 and 1979, the Khmer Rouge regime established a nation-wide security system in order to repress political opponents and impose a classless agrarian society of collective farming. The network of security centres and execution sites throughout Cambodia touched every aspect of Cambodian life through imprisonment, forced transfers and labour, and denial of the necessities of life. In a single decade, one quarter of the population perished.

This serial property of three component parts illustrates the stages of the Khmer Rouge security system. The former M-13 prison (component part A) shows the initial phase during the civil war period, a prototype for subsequent developments. The centrally located former S-21 prison, now Tuol Sleng Genocide Museum, (component part B) in Phnom Penh represents the apex of the system; and its associated execution site, now Choeung Ek Genocidal Center (component part C) reveals its final elimination stage. These three sites represent the full scope of the repressive system of imprisonment, interrogation, torture and execution.

Following the defeat of the Khmer Rouge regime, the Cambodian Memorial Sites became places of memorialisation to honour victims. As places of reflection and learning, the serial property encourages peaceful coexistence among peoples and fosters a commitment to never repeat such atrocities. The property provides an example of the ongoing process of navigating the joint goals of justice and national reconciliation.

Criterion (vi): The Cambodian Memorial Sites demonstrate the events of the Khmer Rouge repressive system of imprisonment, interrogation, torture and execution known internationally as the “killing fields”. The scale and impact of these events and the impacts on the people of Cambodia are of outstanding universal significance. The three component parts were all managed directly by one man (Kaing Guek Eav, known as Duch) accountable to the senior leadership of the Khmer Rouge. All have direct tangible and intangible links with these events through their tangible attributes, documentary evidence and witness accounts.

Integrity

The serial property includes all the attributes necessary to convey the Outstanding Universal Value, and to support the continuing processes of memorialisation. The boundaries of the component parts are satisfactory but are tightly drawn, possibly requiring future revision in light of new discoveries. The component parts have a satisfactory state of conservation, although they are vulnerable due to natural processes, visitor pressures, and urban development.

Authenticity

The serial property is associated with tangible evidence, written and oral information sources that provide insight into the Khmer Rouge security system. The above and below ground attributes of the component parts, together with the associated collections and archives demonstrate the authenticity of the serial property in relation to its Outstanding Universal Value. These information sources are relatively more abundant for the former S-21 prison and execution grounds (component parts B and C) than for the former M-13 prison (component part A). The material evidence of the physical attributes has been well documented using maps, photographs, archaeological investigations, exhumation of human remains and witness accounts. The Tuol Sleng Genocide Museum Archives, included in the UNESCO Memory of World International Register, are a rich resource for understanding these events and their tragic outcomes. In addition, the judicial records of the international Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia (ECCC) support the authenticity of these sites.

Protection and management requirements

The three component parts are all owned by the Royal Government of Cambodia: two by the Ministry of Culture and Fine Arts (A and B) and one by the Phnom Penh Municipality (C). The Phnom Penh Municipality has given a contract to the JC Royal Company to provide the daily operations of the Choeung Ek Genocidal Center (C) as a tourism destination (until 2035).

The property is protected under several Royal Decrees, laws and regulations. Protection is operationalised by the relevant municipal/provincial master plans which require urgent development and finalisation.

A coordinated management mechanism for the property has been established by Royal Decree via an Inter-Ministerial Committee responsible for implementing the protection and management strategies across the three component parts. The Director of the Tuol Sleng Genocide Museum is the overall Coordinating Officer, mandated to oversee the management, conservation, interpretation and other matters related to the property.

The Comprehensive Cultural Management Plan covers conservation of all attributes, visitor and property management, interpretation, protection and appropriate treatment of human remains for each component part. It also addresses the site-specific conservation requirements and regulation of their respective buffer zones. Many of the key actions will be facilitated by the grant from the Korea International Cooperation Agency and UNESCO (KOICA/UNESCO) for the period 2024-2028.

The three component parts have different levels and types of visitation. Two of them (B and C) are heavily visited destinations for tourism and are significant sites of memory visited by Cambodian people. Currently component part A is not accessible for visitors and memorial activities have recently begun. Careful strategic planning for this component part is required, accompanied by rigorous Heritage Impact Assessments. A masterplan for this site will be prepared.

There are few survivors of the Khmer Rouge regime still alive, but the families of victims are involved in the commemoration and educational activities of each of the component parts. The Tuol Sleng Genocide Museum has an extensive educational outreach programme for Cambodian students. There are further opportunities for community involvement in the management system.

News  1
UNESCO World Heritage: 26 new sites inscribed
17 July 2025
Cambodia
Date of Inscription: 2025
Criteria: (vi)
Property : 3.9 ha

Buffer zone: 21.9 ha
Dossier: 1748
Serial: yes

Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026