World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Costiera Amalfitana
Costiera Amalfitana
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Costiera Amalfitana

The Amalfi coast is an area of great physical beauty and natural diversity. It has been intensively settled by human communities since the early Middle Ages. There are a number of towns such as Amalfi and Ravello with architectural and artistic works of great significance. The rural areas show the versatility of the inhabitants in adapting their use of the land to the diverse nature of the terrain, which ranges from terraced vineyards and orchards on the lower slopes to wide upland pastures.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The Costiera Amalfitana, stretches along the southern coast of the Sorrentine Peninsula in Salerno province and can rightly be defined as a landscape of outstanding cultural value, thanks to the astonishing work of both nature and humankind. Its dramatic topography and historical evolution have produced exceptional cultural and natural scenic values. Nature is both unspoiled and harmoniously fused with the results of human activity. The landscape is marked by rocky areas, wood and maquis, but also by citrus groves and vineyards, grown wherever human beings could find a suitable spot.

The Costiera Amalfitana covers 11,231 hectares, a large area that encompasses 15 municipalities, agricultural lands and three natural reserves. The region has been populated since prehistoric times as illustrated by the Palaeolithic and Mesolithic remains found at Positano. While it became a Roman colony in the 4th century, the region has been intensively settled since the beginning of Middle Ages.

On the southern side of the peninsula, a natural border is formed by Lattari Mountains which extends from peaks of Picentini Mountains as far as Tyrrhenian Sea, dividing the Gulf of Naples from the Gulf of Salerno. The World Heritage property is composed of four main coastal areas (Amalfi, Atrani, Reginna Maior, and Reginna Minor) and some secondary areas (Positano, Praiano, Cetara, and Erchie), with the characteristic villages of Scala, Tramonti and Ravello, and the hamlets of Conca and Furore. Several of these historical centres, flourished during the period of the great power hold by the Amalfi Sea Republic and, as a result, contain numerous artistic and architectural masterpieces, some of which are the result of the fusion of eastern and western elements known as “Arabic-Norman” style. Agricultural areas are witness to the capacity of its inhabitants to adapt, in the best way, to the different types of land. They developed terrace cultivation for vineyards and fruit gardens in the bottom area and practiced sheep-farming in the upper area.

Criterion (ii): The Costiera Amalfitana is an outstanding cultural landscape with exceptional cultural and natural scenic values resulting from its dramatic topography and historical evolution. Much of its architecture and artistic works reflect a fusion of eastern and western influences linked to the period of the economic power of Amalfi Sea Republic between the 9th and 11th centuries.

Criterion (iv): The Costiera Amalfitana is an outstanding example of a Mediterranean landscape that has evolved over many centuries in an area of great physical beauty and natural diversity. It has been intensively settled since the early Middle Ages. There are a number of towns, such as Amalfi and Ravello, with architectural and artistic works of great significance.

Criterion (v): The Costiera Amalfitana represents an example of complex settlement since within it there is an exceptional diversity of landscape types, ranging from ancient urban settlements through areas of intensive land-use and cultivation and pastoralism to areas untouched by human intervention. The complex topography and resulting climatic variations provide habitats with an exceptional range of plant species within a relatively confined area.

Integrity

The extended area of the Costiera Amalfitana contains all fundamental and necessary components to express its Outstanding Universal Value. The boundary encloses a wide territory characterized by terraced gardens near the sea, harsh mountains dropping away on the coast, and a natural habitat particularly rich and diverse in vegetation. The historical centres have witnessed the particular settlement evolution connoted by simultaneous values of a country, urban, mountain and sea culture.

Threats identified for the area include environmental pressure and natural disasters such as landslides and earthquakes as well as the pressure of intense tourism visitation in some urban areas particularly due to vehicular traffic.

Authenticity

The overall authenticity of the landscape as a whole with its rich diversity of scenery and settlement is high. Peculiar features of the site have been preserved over the centuries.

The original layout and form of many of the urban areas have been dictated by the coastal geography. Their narrow streets and steep stairs are reminiscent of eastern souks. Agriculture of citrus groves, olive orchards and vineyards are supported along the terraced slopes bounded by drystone walls. In some parts of the Costiera the natural landscape survives intact, with little, if any, human intervention. Some of these areas are accessed by ancient, narrow mountain paths or mule tracks that historically connected farms and villages. Traditional activities continue including crafts such as the ceramics influenced by Arabic culture, farming and some types of fishing.

Protection and management requirements

The Costiera Amalfitana has been safeguarded by Italian law for many years and protection exists at the national, regional and local levels. The site is preserved as landscape by Decreto Legislativo 42/2004, the Code of cultural heritage and landscape, a safeguarding measure which is applied in areas declared by a law decree to be of interest for their landscape resources. There are legal decrees recognising the great landscape value for all the municipalities within the property and individual ministerial decrees under which the whole territory is under landscape protection. In these areas, authorization for any form of intervention is granted or denied by the relevant authority (the Municipalities and the Soprintendenza, peripheral office of the Ministry for Cultural Heritage and Activities and Tourism in charge of protection).

The territory of the coast is protected regionally by the Urban Territorial Plan (with value of Landscape Plan), approved by a regional law that also identifies historical-cultural aspects of the landscape which is subjected to careful protection.

Apart from protected landscape of the Costiera Amalfitana, individual buildings are also preserved by the Code of cultural heritage and landscape, which covers public and ecclesiastic buildings and about 50 private buildings that are considered of great historical and cultural value. Any activity must be authorized by the relevant Soprintendenza which can deny it for conservation reasons, authorize intervention with limitations, or authorize only an intervention which does not damage the resource in question. In addition to recognized buildings of cultural interest, other complexes worthy of protection have been identified through inventory campaigns.

At regional level, the area is protected by a series of laws. These provide approval to the land coordination and landscape management plan for Sorrento and Amalfi, within which the mentioned area is located. The objectives of this plan are to restore the relationship of the peninsula and its territory, protect the environment (both natural and human-made), provide for soil conservation, upgrade urban infrastructure, and enhance the role of tourism as a positive force. Furthermore, a wider territory than the property is protected under a regional decree as Parco Regionale dei Monti Lattari. Consequently, the property has additional protection under the park’s management plan. At the local level, urban planning instruments define further preservation laws for historical centres.

Property ownership is distributed among central, regional, provincial, and local administrations as well as many private individuals and institutions. The Comunità Montana ‘Penisola Amalfitana’ is established by law in order to prepare policies for the development and enhancement of local resources and the coordination of all planning, implementation and management of public works and programmes. The legislation was set up with the objective to accelerate the decision-making process and achieve a more cost-effective management of public affairs. Long-term socio-economic development plans are also prepared under this legislation to strengthen and develop economic activities and improve social services. Overall supervision for the protection of heritage is the responsibility of the Ministry for Cultural Heritage and Activities and Tourism and its peripheral office.

The main elements have been entered in a database, which is part of the Management Plan. These elements are monitored through data bank cross-collations which are available on an interactive portal. The Management Plan of Costiera Amalfitana is designed to assist in the coherent implementation of territorial policies that preserve heritage value for the property. From this point of view, this document provides for a coordination role in the preservation of the site’s integrity, moreover, it combines preservation and protection with development and valorisation of historical, cultural and local environmental resources in order to create a compatible local process shared by several economic and institutional organizations, which represent different and occasionally opposing interests. Furthermore, some designated monuments in the area have been subjected to systematic conservation programmes for many years. Following the introduction of the requirement to produce urban management plans, more attention is being paid to towns and villages.

No buffer zone has been defined for this property as initially its large size and local topography deemed it unnecessary. Nevertheless, to sustain the Outstanding Universal Value of the property, the creation of a buffer zone would be considered beneficial.

Links
Costiera Amalfitana (in Italian)

 View photos from OUR PLACE the World Heritage collection

Costiera Amalfitana Tour: Home Page

Amalfi and Amalfi coast

Amalfi Coast On Line (only in Italian)

Amalfi Tourist Bureau

Activities 2
World Heritage Cities Programme
Cultural Landscapes
News  1
World Heritage Committee Inscribes 46 New Sites on World Heritage List
7 December 1997
Media
play_arrow Costiera Amalfitana (UNESCO/NHK)
Italy
Date of Inscription: 1997
Criteria: (ii)(iv)(v)
Property : 11,231 ha

Dossier: 830
Province of Salerno, Campania
N40 37 60 E14 36 10
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026