World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Cocos Island National Park
Cocos Island National Park
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Assistance
Cocos Island National Park

Cocos Island National Park, located 550 km off the Pacific coast of Costa Rica, is the only island in the tropical eastern Pacific with a tropical rainforest. Its position as the first point of contact with the northern equatorial counter-current, and the myriad interactions between the island and the surrounding marine ecosystem, make the area an ideal laboratory for the study of biological processes. The underwater world of the national park has become famous due to the attraction it holds for divers, who rate it as one of the best places in the world to view large pelagic species such as sharks, rays, tuna and dolphins.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Cocos Island National Park is located in the Eastern Tropical Pacific, covering an area of 202,100 hectares some 530 kilometers off the Costa Rica mainland. The island itself, “Isla del Coco”, also known as “Treasure Island”, is the only landmark of the vast submarine Cocos Range. With a surface area of 2,400 hectares it supports the only humid tropical forest on an oceanic island in the Eastern Tropical Pacific. The remaining 199,700 hectares protect not only diverse marine ecosystems, mostly pelagic but also, the most diverse coral reefs of the entire Eastern Tropical Pacific. Thanks to its remote location and conservation efforts, the biologically highly diverse property constitutes one of the best conserved marine tropical waters, well-known as a world-class diving destination. The property belongs to the Eastern Tropical Pacific Marine Corridor, a marine conservation network, which also includes World Heritage properties in Colombia, Ecuador and Panama. 

Natural population densities of large top predators indicate a near pristine conservation status of a property that is among the most important sites in the Eastern Tropical Pacific for the protection of large pelagic migratory species, such as the endangered Scalloped Hammerhead Shark and the near-threatened Silky Shark and Galapagos Shark. Due to its geographical position, the oceanic island of volcanic origin is the first landmark met by the North Equatorial Countercurrent and a point of confluence of other marine currents. This makes it a dispersing centre of larvae of marine species from various parts of the Pacific Ocean. In its land portion, the property hosts a remarkable degree of endemism across most diverse taxonomic groups. There are, for instance, three endemic bird species, two endemic freshwater fish and two endemic reptile species. Cocos Island National Park is of irreplaceable global conservation value, reminding us what parts of tropical oceans historically looked like. 

Criterion (ix): The property harbours a rare and complex mosaic of land and sea environments, including forested mountains, rivers, waterfalls, estuaries, cliffs, sandy and rocky beaches, bays, and extensive and highly diverse coral reefs and pelagic environments. The oceanic island, more than 500 kilometers off the continent, is mostly occupied by tropical rainforest and, from around 500 m.a.s.l. to the highest elevation at 634 m.a.s.l., by cloud forest. The isolation has been allowing ongoing evolutionary processes on land, giving origin to countless endemic species in the most diverse taxonomic groups, including several vertebrate species. The geographic location at the meeting point of the North Equatorial Countercurrent with other major marine currents and the ecological interactions between a remote island and the surrounding marine ecosystems are of major scientific importance. The currents and the island affect the movements and distribution of the many migratory marine species aggregating for feeding and reproduction in the waters around the island. The property serves as a dispersion centre of larvae of numerous marine species coming from the entire Pacific. The islets and rocks around the main island are reported to also serve as important cleaning stations, i.e. pelagic species aggregate to have parasites removed by specialised fish and other species. 

Criterion (x): The small island supports the only tropical forest ecosystem located on an oceanic island within the Tropical Eastern Pacific. It is home to some 70 endemic species of vascular plants and several endemic animals, including three birds, two reptiles and even two freshwater fish. Smaller satellite rocks around the island support nesting and resting habitats for numerous migratory and resident bird species. However, the main species conservation value derives from critical marine habitat and the corresponding role of the property in the conservation of large pelagic species, especially several species of sharks. Among the latter are exceptional aggregations of the near-threatened Silky and Lemon Shark, the vulnerable Bigeye Thresher Shark and Galapagos Shark, the emblematic and endangered Hammerhead Shark, as well as White-tip Reef Shark and Black-tip Shark. Among some 300 recorded fish species are important aggregations of large pelagic fish, such as the vulnerable Whale Shark and Blue Marlin, as well as Sailfish Broadbill Swordfish, Shortbill Spearfish, Giant Manta Ray and Pelagic Stingray. Blue Whale and Bottlenose Dolphin are among the visiting marine mammals. 

Integrity

The isolation of Cocos Island National Park contributes to the safeguarding of evolutionary processes, which are the basis of the notable richness and abundance of land and marine life forms. Provided that alien invasive species of both flora and fauna can be controlled, the conservation prospects on land are promising. In the marine areas, the large aggregations of top predators, including but not limited to numerous shark species, demonstrate the integrity within an intensively fished marine region. The entire property is one of the rare marine no-take areas and as such makes an invaluable contribution to conservation as a safe haven for marine life, and as a nursery and dispersal centre – provided illegal fishing can be kept at bay. While many of the aggregations occur in a relatively small area within the property, the marine limits fail to do justice to the life cycles of the many migratory species. Cocos Island National Park cannot achieve the long-term conservation of species indiscriminately exploited in the wider Eastern Tropical Pacific and elsewhere. The critical factor for the long run integrity not only requires adequate management of the property but also sustainable fishing levels outside of it. The Eastern Tropical Pacific Marine Corridor provides a highly needed framework for international cooperation in this regard. 

Protection and management requirements

While there is no evidence of pre-Columbian occupation, fishermen, pirates, whalers, commercial sailors and scientific expeditions have long used Cocos Island as shelter and to procure fresh water. Attempts to settle the island include a brief episode of running a prison, but eventually all such attempts have been unsuccessful. Today the human presence is restricted to a rotating group of conservation staff, tourists, and visiting scientists. The entire property is strictly protected by law, state-owned and managed by Costa Rica’s National Park Service under the Ministry of Environment and Energy in cooperation with other governmental and non-governmental institutions, such as the “Friends of Cocos Island Foundation”. Any extraction of marine resources and all commercial, industrial or agricultural activities are banned. Management planning guides interventions with a focus on planning of public use and tourism, protection of sensitive sites, alien invasive species, scientific research, and the review of relevant legislation. Sufficient staff and funding is needed to secure adequate operations, which is costly due to the remote location.

On land, the main threats are invasive alien species of both flora and fauna. While no mammals originally existed on the island, deer, wild boar, cats and rats have been introduced with complex effects on the ecosystems, as well-documented from small island settings around the globe. Temporary settlers brought plants like guinea grass and coffee. The latter has since been invading the understory of the forests. Continuous monitoring and management are needed to eradicate alien invasive species to the degree possible and to prevent new invasions through and strict and enforced protocols for all visitors to the island. In the waters, illegal fishing is common despite efforts by national authorities and non-governmental organizations. Therefore, continuous monitoring and law enforcement is needed, as is awareness-raising with the fishing industry. Tourism activities around the island, mostly recreational diving, likewise require adequate monitoring and control to prevent disturbance in the highly localised areas of major aggregations of fish, as well as littering and other pollution caused by passing vessels and yachts. Following the 1982/1983 El Niño event, about 90 percent of the coral reefs of Cocos National Park died off, a dramatic reminder how protected areas can be affected by events far beyond their boundaries. Eventually, for conservation to be effective in the long term, measures are needed at a much larger geographical scale. These measures could include extensions, buffer zones and, at the international level, coordination and cooperation with other marine protected areas in the Eastern Tropical Pacific, including World Heritage properties in Colombia, Ecuador and Panama.

Links
Protectedplanet.net

Activities 3
World Heritage Marine Programme
Eastern Tropical Pacific Seascape Project
Culture|2030 Indicators National Profile of Costa Rica
News  13
Frigatebirds, Boobies & Sharks accompany eDNA Expedition in Cocos Islands National Park
6 December 2022
Ocean: UNESCO launches emergency plan to boost World Heritage-listed reefs’ resilience
14 April 2022
Marine World Heritage-inspired artwork to celebrate World Oceans Day
8 June 2018
Spearheading a global conservation movement: Marine World Heritage 2018 annual report
6 February 2018
More add
Events  1
World Heritage Festival in Costa Rica
19 Nov 2022 - 20 Nov 2022
Media
play_arrow Cocos Island National Park (UNESCO/NHK)
play_arrow NHK World Heritage 100 Series
Costa Rica
Date of Inscription: 1997
Significant modifications to the boundaries : 2002
Criteria: (ix)(x)
Property : 199,700 ha

Dossier: 820bis
Province of Puntarenas, South Eastern Tropical Pacific
N5 31 60 W87 4 0
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2002
Protections
by other conservation instruments

1 protection / 1 element

RAMSAR (1 element)

Isla del Coco

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026