World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Gros Morne National Park
Gros Morne National Park
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Best Practice
Gros Morne National Park

Situated on the west coast of the island of Newfoundland, the park provides a rare example of the process of continental drift, where deep ocean crust and the rocks of the earth's mantle lie exposed. More recent glacial action has resulted in some spectacular scenery, with coastal lowland, alpine plateau, fjords, glacial valleys, sheer cliffs, waterfalls and many pristine lakes.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Gros Morne National Park, located on the Great Northern Peninsula in the Canadian province of Newfoundland and Labrador, illustrates some of the world’s best examples of the process of plate tectonics. Within a relatively small area are classic, textbook examples of monumental earth-building and modifying forces that are unique in terms of their clarity, expression and ease of access. The property presents the complete portrayal of the geological events that took place when the ancient continental margin of North America was modified by plate movement by emplacement of a large, relocated portion of oceanic crust and ocean floor sediments. The park also presents an outstanding demonstration of glaciations in an island setting. The fjords, waterfalls and geological structures of the park combine to produce a landscape of high scenic value.

Criterion (vii): Gros Morne National Park, an outstanding wilderness environment of spectacular landlocked, freshwater fjords and glacier-scoured headlands in an ocean setting, is an area of exceptional natural beauty.

Criterion (viii): The rocks of Gros Morne National Park collectively present an internationally significant illustration of the process of continental drift along the eastern coast of North America and contribute greatly to the body of knowledge and understanding of plate tectonics and the geological evolution of ancient mountain belts. In glacier-scoured highlands and spectacular fjords, glaciation has made visible the park’s many geological features.

Integrity

Gros Morne National Park’s clearly defined boundary encompasses an area measuring 180,500 hectares. This area is of sufficient size to completely portray the progression of geological events that took place when an ancient ocean and the ancient continental margin of eastern North America were destroyed and uplifted to form a mountain chain through the action of plate tectonics. Collectively the sequences of rocks that illustrate this geological evolution are represented by: an ancient continental crust composed of intensely metamorphosed granite and gneisses; a continental shelf with tropical carbonate sediments, containing abundant fossils; a continental slope of thick sequences of shales inter-bedded with limestone conglomerates, also with abundant fossils; a complete cross section of oceanic lithosphere including large exposures of mantle material; and significant sequences of volcanic rocks of oceanic origin.

These geologic features and the glacially-derived topography are in near-pristine condition in Gros Morne National Park. This condition is likely to persist since there is effective legislation to protect the property from development and since the property is managed in a way that can accommodate the current or projected number of visitors without adverse effects. Additionally, the collection of rocks and fossils is controlled and limited to research purposes. The natural process of erosion is ongoing and continues to shape and expose the geologic sequences upon which the World Heritage designation is based.

The integrity of the geological features on which the World Heritage inscription rests is not adversely affected by any of the stressors identified in the national park’s management plan. However, a moose population introduced over 100 years ago in Newfoundland has expanded and degraded native forests creating visual and ecological impacts in the park. Steps are being taken to mitigate this problem.

Protection and management requirements

The Canada National Parks Act provides effective legal protection for the property. As part of the formal management planning processes required under this legislation, the property’s heritage resources are monitored in a structured way for early identification of threats and stressors. As a principle of practice, strategies to address vulnerabilities are developed in cooperation with area residents as well as with other stakeholders and user groups as appropriate. The park’s management plan is updated every 10 years.

There are two right-of-way corridors that exist in Gros Morne National Park: a highway transportation corridor and a hydro-electric transmission corridor. Any decisions Parks Canada makes with respect to these corridors are made within the context of protecting the park’s ecological integrity and its Outstanding Universal Value.

Developmental pressures external to the park boundary include offshore oil and gas exploration and potential developments on provincially-owned Crown lands. National park management monitors the progress of these as well as any other potential external developments and provides input into all formal regulatory consultation processes regarding them with a view to protecting the site’s Outstanding Universal Value, in addition to its ecological integrity.

Links
Facebook page

Gros Morne National Park

Canadian Sites on the World Heritage List

Gros Morne National Park (Parks Canada)

World Heritage in Canada (Parks Canada)

Protectedplanet.net

Activities 1
Youth Component, 32nd session of the World Heritage Committee (2008)
Media
play_arrow Gros Morne National Park (UNESCO/NHK)
Canada
Date of Inscription: 1987
Criteria: (vii)(viii)
Property : 180,500 ha

Dossier: 419
Provinces of Newfoundland and Labrador
N49 36 45 W57 31 53
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2021 2018 2016 2014 2013 2001 2000
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026