World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Amphitheatre of El Jem
Amphitheatre of El Jem
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Amphitheatre of El Jem

The impressive ruins of the largest colosseum in North Africa, a huge amphitheatre which could hold up to 35,000 spectators, are found in the small village of El Jem. This 3rd-century monument illustrates the grandeur and extent of Imperial Rome.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The Amphitheatre of El Jem bears outstanding witness to Roman architecture, notably monuments built for spectator events, in Africa. Located in a plain in the centre of Tunisia, this amphitheatre is built entirely of stone blocks, with no foundations and free-standing.  In this respect it is modelled on the Coliseum of Rome without being an exact copy of the Flavian construction. Its size (big axis of 148 metres and small axis 122 metres) and its capacity (judged to be 35,000 spectators) make it without a doubt among the largest amphitheatres in the world. Its facade comprises three levels of arcades of Corinthian or composite style. Inside, the monument has conserved most of the supporting infrastructure for the tiered seating. The wall of the podium, the arena and the underground passages are practically intact. This architectural and artistic creation built around 238 AD, constitutes an important milestone in the comprehension of the history of Roman Africa. The Amphitheatre of El Jem also bears witness to the prosperity of the small city of Thysdrus (current El Jem) at the time of the Roman Empire.

Criterion (iv): The Amphitheatre of El Jem is one of the rare monuments of its kind and unique in Africa, which is not built against a hillside, but on flat ground and supported by a complex system of arches. The monument of El Jem is one of the most accomplished examples of Roman architecture of an amphitheatre, almost equal to that of the Coliseum of Rome.

Criterion (vi): The construction in a far-off province of a sophisticated and complex building, designed for popular spectacles, is characteristic of imperial Roman propaganda.

Integrity (2009)

The monument has conserved, without alteration, most of its architectural and architectonic components.

Authenticity (2009)

Restoration work carried out over time has not affected the essential functional and structural authenticity of the property.  The authenticity of the setting is however threatened by the appearance of new constructions around the amphitheatre.

Protection and management requirements (2009)

The Amphitheatre of El Jem is protected by the Law 35-1994 concerning the protection of archaeological and historic heritage and of traditional arts, and by a Decree that limits the height of the buildings to 5 metres over an area of 300 metres from the centre of the amphitheatre. The Heritage Code provides for the right to examine all intervention around the monument (controlled zone) while the development plan of the town of El Jem defines specific areas around the monument, archaeological and controlled zones and vision cones to preserve the urban perspectives.

The management of this property is assured by a mixed unit for conservation, restoration and presentation of the Amphitheatre of El Jem; it is composed of the National Heritage Institute, responsible scientific and technical body, and the Agency for the Presentation of Heritage and Cultural Promotion, responsible for the commercial exploitation of cultural heritage and its presentation. The creation of a buffer zone to protect the property against continuing urban development that might have an impact on its setting, and the establishment of an appropriate regulation to preserve the authenticity of its surroundings, are being studied.

Publications
Ennabli, Abdelmajid. "North Africa's Roman art. Its future" in North Africa's Roman art. Its future , September 2000, pp 18-29
Events  2
Call for Applications: 3rd Capacity building workshop on digital documentation of World Heritage sites in the Arab States region
19 May 2025 - 23 May 2025
Bikeabout To Launch Circum-Mediterranean Tour Of World Heritage Sites
24 Sep 1997 - 30 Jun 1998
Media
play_arrow Amphitheatre of El Jem (UNESCO/NHK)
Tunisia
Date of Inscription: 1979
Minor boundary modification inscribed year: 2010
Criteria: (iv)(vi)
Property : 1.37 ha

Buffer zone: 26.42 ha
Dossier: 38bis
El-Mahdia
N35 17 47.004 E10 42 24.984
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

1992
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026