World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Old town of Kuldīga
Old town of Kuldīga
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Old town of Kuldīga
Located in the western part of Latvia, the town of Kuldīga is an exceptionally well-preserved example of a traditional urban settlement, which developed from a small medieval hamlet into an important administrative centre of the Duchy of Courland and Semigallia between the 16th and 18th centuries. The town structure of Kuldīga has largely retained the street layout of that period, and includes traditional log architecture as well as foreign-influenced styles that illustrate the rich exchange between local and travelling craftspeople from around the Baltic Sea. The architectural influences and craftsmanship traditions introduced during the period of the Duchy endured well into the 19th century.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Located in the western part of Latvia, in the central Kurzeme (Courland) region, the town of Kuldīga is an exceptionally well-preserved example of a traditional urban settlement. At the confluence of the Venta River and the smaller Alekšupīte stream, the beginnings of Kuldīga, which was called Goldingen at the time, date back to the 13th century. The rivers’ intersection is a defining element of the town’s structure, contributing to its scenic character. The medieval area of Kalnamiests, located on a hill, is clearly distinguishable in the townscape, given its oval shape.

A significant part of Kuldīga’s history and development is linked to the Duchy of Courland and Semigallia, which governed a significant part of the Baltics between 1561 and 1795. The town was the primary residence and administrative centre of the Duchy’s first ruler and maintained an important role afterwards. As a result, the town developed into a prosperous trading hub. The international orientation of the Duchy led to a rising number of foreign merchants and craftsmen settling in Kuldīga, who left their mark on the architectural language and building decoration of the region. The town’s structure has largely retained the street layout which developed during the period of the Duchy.

The architectural influences and craftsmanship traditions introduced during the era of the Duchy endured well into the 19th century. However, different laws and regulations, aimed at fire safety, led to the progressive replacement of fire hazardous roofing materials. The proportion of masonry buildings also increased, replacing traditional wooden ones.  In the second half of the 19th century, the brick bridge over the Venta River was constructed, connecting Kuldīga to the east.

Unlike other towns in the Baltic region, Kuldīga survived the great wars of the 20th century largely unscathed and modern urban developments were largely implemented far outside its historic centre. 

Criterion (v): The old town of Kuldīga is an outstanding example of a well-preserved urban settlement, representative of traditional Baltic architecture and urbanism and of multiple historical periods – from the 13th to the early 20th centuries. Its historic urban fabric includes structures of traditional local log architecture as well as largely foreign-influenced techniques and styles of brick masonry and timber-framed houses that illustrate the integration of local craftsmanship with foreign influences from other Hanse towns and centres around the Baltic Sea as well as Russia. The craft skills are prominent in functional and ornamental building details throughout the town and continue to be employed by craftspeople today. The predominance of clay tiles as a roofing material contributes to the harmonious townscape of Kuldīga.

Integrity

The property encompasses the medieval castle mound plateau, the medieval area known as Kalnamiests, and the urban areas which developed during the ducal period from the 16th until the 18th centuries but continued to organically evolve afterwards. In addition, large areas of the environmental setting of Kuldīga are also included, namely the intersection of the Venta and Alekšupīte rivers, as well as the Ventas Rumba waterfall, which was essential for the growth of Kuldīga into a trading centre.

In the past, fires destroyed substantial parts of the urban fabric and remain a risk to this day, since the town has many wooden buildings as well as buildings with important wooden elements. Floods are another important factor that can potentially affect the property, particularly in view of climate change. To maintain the harmonious townscape, the town’s general construction rules stipulate maximum building heights within the property and its buffer zone.

The boundaries of the property coincide, for the most part, with the national designation of the “urban construction monument” of state importance. The area of the Venta Valley is not included in that designation but is protected as a nature reserve. The buffer zone corresponds to the “individual protection zone” and has complementary legal provisions in order to give an added layer of protection to the property.  

Authenticity

Kuldīga’s urban and architectural heritage is well retained in terms of material, design and craftsmanship. It illustrates continuity in function and use as residences, auxiliary structures and religious spaces for the resident community. The old town further preserves its authenticity in setting and location, which was a fundamental aspect for the development of the urban structure of the town, influenced by the intersection of the Venta and Alekšupīte rivers. The river landscape has changed over time but not to the extent that it fundamentally alters the environmental setting of the property.

Protection and management requirements

The property was first nationally recognised in 1969 and received the highest level of national protection as a cultural monument under the national Law “On the Protection of Cultural Monuments”. The landscape elements of the Venta Valley have been protected since 1957 and were recognised in 2004 as part of the NATURA 2000 network. The buffer zone also has legal status as a monument of architecture (urban construction) of local importance in the list of state protected cultural monuments.

On a local level, multiple planning documents, such as a local territorial development plan, define strict legal mechanisms that contribute to the protection of the historic urban settlement and further prevent development pressures that might affect the property’s significance.

Kuldīga Municipality acts as the main management authority for the property and its buffer zone. With regards to the conservation of historic buildings, the Kuldīga Restoration Centre is an essential partner of the municipality. The day-to-day management of the World Heritage property is guided by a management plan, which is complemented by subsidiary plans related to risk management and tourism management.

Links
Kuldīga (Goldingen) UNESCO

Latvia
Date of Inscription: 2023
Criteria: (v)
Property : 84.33 ha

Buffer zone: 88.85 ha
Dossier: 1658
N56 58 3.9 E21 58 17.5
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026