World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Abbey and Altenmünster of Lorsch
Abbey and Altenmünster of Lorsch
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Abbey and Altenmünster of Lorsch

The abbey, together with its monumental entrance, the famous 'Torhall', are rare architectural vestiges of the Carolingian era. The sculptures and paintings from this period are still in remarkably good condition.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The town of Lorsch in Hesse, Germany, hosts the renowned “Königshalle”. Apart from the Gothic gables and a few relics of past repairs and completion, this gatehouse is one of the very rare buildings from the Carolingian era whose original appearance is intact. It is a reminder of the past grandeur of an abbey founded around 764. The monastery’s zenith was probably in 876 when, at the death of Louis II the German, it became the burial place for the Carolingian kings of the Eastern part of the Frankish Realm.

The monastery flourished throughout the 11th century, but in 1090 was ravaged by fire. In the 12th century, an expansive reconstruction was carried out. After Lorsch had been incorporated in the Electorate of Mainz (1232), it lost a large part of its privileges. The Benedictines were replaced first by Cistercians and later by Premonstratensians. Moreover, the church had to be restored after yet another fire and be adapted to changing liturgical needs. The glorious Carolingian establishment slowly deteriorated under the impact of the vagaries of politics and war: Lorsch was attached to the Palatinate in 1461, returned to Mainz in 1623, and incorporated in the Electorate of Hesse in 1803. Monastic life finished in succession of the protestant reformation of the Palatinate in 1556. 

Criterion (iii): The religious complex represented by the former Lorsch Abbey, with its 1200-year-old gatehouse in unique and excellent condition, comprises a rare architectural document of the Carolingian era with impressively preserved sculpture and painting of that period.

Criterion (iv): The Lorsch Abbey, with its Carolingian gatehouse, gives architectural evidence of the awakening of the West to the spirit of the Early and High Middle Ages under the first King and Emperor, Charlemagne. 

Integrity

In the case of the Abbey and Altenmünster of Lorsch, the integrity is related to the architectural remains, i.e. the entrance hall and main body of the Abbey church, documenting an astonishing variety of architectural styles. The Abbey wall and the commercial constructions following the heyday of the Abbey provide an example and – to a certain extent – represent symbols of the rise, glory, and fall of one of Europe’s great Abbeys, of which not one has remained preserved. Never having been superstructured, at least two thirds of the Abbey’s area represents an intact archaeological site, preserving the material relics of more than 800 years of monastic life. Together with the monumental remains and the conserved fragments of the ancient library, the cultural heritage of Lorsch Abbey has been one of the most powerful and active spiritual centers in Central Europe for several centuries. 

Authenticity

The Abbey and Altenmünster of Lorsch fulfils the conditions of authenticity through the preserved buildings themselves, in particular through the “Königshalle”, which still represents the best preserved and largely intact surviving example of architecture of the Carolingian era in Central Europe.

All the buildings are maintained, preserved, researched, and presented with the greatest possible care. The sculptures and paintings from this period are still in remarkably good condition. 

Protection and management requirements

The laws and regulations of the Federal Republic of Germany and the State of Hesse guarantee the consistent protection of the Abbey and Altenmünster of Lorsch and its surroundings. Both are listed monuments according to the Act on the Protection of Cultural Monuments in the State of Hesse. The Hessian building code regulates the realisation of single building projects. The land-use plan, as well as building plans and the preservation statute of the city of Lorsch, guarantees the protection of the visual integrity. Complemented by the management plan, this differentiated protective system ensures an efficient preservation of the historical substance in good condition. The buffer zone underwent a minor boundary modification to further ensure the protection of the site.

The State Administration for Palaces and Gardens of Hesse is in charge of the management of the Abbey, the city of Lorsch is responsible for the Altenmünster. A special heritage service led by an expert acts on site. In the case of difficult conservation issues, the State Administration for Palaces and Gardens of Hesse calls an independent, international expert commission to guarantee highest standards for the preservation of the historical substance of the World Heritage property.

Links
Staatlichen Schlösser und Gärten Hessen (in German)

Kloster Lorsch (in German)

Kloster Lorsch (in German)

UNESCO Commission of Germany

Kloster Lorsch (Deutsche UNESCO-Kommission)

Media
play_arrow Abbey and Altenmünster of Lorsch (UNESCO/NHK)
Germany
Date of Inscription: 1991
Minor boundary modification inscribed year: 2011
Criteria: (iii)(iv)
Property : 3.34 ha

Buffer zone: 29.65 ha
Dossier: 515bis
Serial: yes

Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
Protections
by other conservation instruments

1 protection / 1 element

Geoparks (1 element)

Bergstraße-Odenwald UNESCO Global Geopark

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026