World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Kluane / Wrangell-St. Elias / Glacier Bay / ...
Kluane / Wrangell-St. Elias / Glacier Bay / Tatshenshini-Alsek
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Kluane / Wrangell-St. Elias / Glacier Bay / Tatshenshini-Alsek

These parks comprise an impressive complex of glaciers and high peaks on both sides of the border between Canada (Yukon Territory and British Columbia) and the United States (Alaska). The spectacular natural landscapes are home to many grizzly bears, caribou and Dall's sheep. The site contains the largest non-polar icefield in the world.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The Kluane / Wrangell-St. Elias / Glacier Bay / Tatshenshini-Alsek national parks and protected areas along the boundary of Canada and the United States of America contain the largest non-polar icefield in the world as well as examples of some of the world’s longest and most spectacular glaciers. Characterized by high mountains, icefields and glaciers, the property transitions from northern interior to coastal biogeoclimatic zones, resulting in high biodiversity with plant and animal communities ranging from marine, coastal forest, montane, sub-alpine and alpine tundra, all in various successional stages. The Tatshenshini and Alsek river valleys are pivotal because they allow ice-free linkages from coast to interior for plant and animal migration. The parks demonstrate some of the best examples of glaciation and modification of landscape by glacial action in a region still tectonically active, spectacularly beautiful, and where natural processes prevail.

Criterion (vii): The joint properties encompass the breadth of active tectonic, volcanic, glacial and fluvial natural processes from the ocean to some of the highest peaks in North America. Coastal and marine environments, snow-capped mountains, calving glaciers, deep river canyons, fjord-like inlets and abundant wildlife abound. It is an area of exceptional natural beauty.

Criterion (viii): These tectonically active joint properties feature continuous mountain building and contain outstanding examples of major ongoing geologic and glacial processes. Over 200 glaciers in the ice-covered central plateau combine to form some of the world’s largest and longest glaciers, several of which stretch to the sea. The site displays a broad range of glacial processes, including world-class depositional features and classic examples of moraines, hanging valleys, and other geomorphological features.

Criterion (ix): The influence of glaciation at a landscape level has led to a similarly broad range of stages in ecological succession related to the dynamic movements of glaciers. Subtly different glacial environments and landforms have been concentrated within the property by the sharp temperature and precipitation variation between the coast and interior basins. There is a rich variety of terrestrial and coastal/marine environments with complex and intricate mosaics of life at various successional stages from 500 m below sea level to 5000 m above.

Criterion (x): Wildlife species common to Alaska and Northwestern Canada are well represented, some in numbers exceeded nowhere else. The marine components support a great variety of fauna including marine mammals and anadromous fish, the spawning of which is a key ecological component linking the sea to the land through the large river systems. Populations of bears, wolves, caribou, salmon, Dall sheep and mountain goats that are endangered elsewhere are self-regulating here. This is one of the few places remaining in the world where ecological processes are governed by natural stresses and the evolutionary changes in a glacial and ecological continuum.

Integrity

At 9,839,121 ha, including 242,700 ha of marine waters and 1,900 km of coastline, the property is vast and encompasses all the elements required to express its exceptional beauty and scientific values. The boundaries connect key land masses within which a wide breadth of glacial, ecological and biological processes are exhibited. Geomorphological processes are shown in the various successive stages of altitude within the property. Healthy terrestrial and marine fish and wildlife populations of key species endemic to the northwest of the North American continent are well-represented within the property, ecological processes are functioning naturally within intact ecosystems, and the property as a whole retains its wilderness values and character, and its scenic beauty.

Park management plans have identified a number of resource protection measures, such as environmental assessment processes, zoning, ecological integrity and visitor experience monitoring, and education programs to address internal and external pressures from recreational use, commercial growth and development adjacent to the property. These measures allow the property managers to monitor and respond to any long term challenges in order to protect the property’s integrity into the future. Sport or subsistence harvest of fish and wildlife, including commercial trapping, are closely monitored and managed sustainably in areas where these activities are allowed.

Protection and management requirements

The property consists of four components that are protected and managed under specific legislative frameworks within Canada and the United States of America. Kluane National Park and Reserve is managed under the authority of the Canada National Parks Act and its associated regulations which govern the protection and management of the natural and cultural resources of the park. Land Claim Final Agreements with the Champagne and Aishihik and Kluane First Nations provide additional direction for the protection and management of the park’s natural and cultural resources. These agreements have also established the Kluane National Park Management Board, a co-operative management regime for managing park resources.

Wrangell-St. Elias and Glacier Bay National Park and Preserves are administered under the authority of the Organic Act of August 25, 1916 which established the United States National Park Service, as well as specific enabling legislation for each park and other laws and regulations pertaining to the National Park Service. Day-to-day management is directed by a Park Superintendent and these parks are managed in accordance with the legislative and regulatory mandates of the U.S. National Park Service. Wrangell-St. Elias National Park and Preserve has formal government-to-government agreements with three federally recognized tribal governments: the Cheesh'na Tribal Council, the Mentasta Traditional Council, and the Yakutat Tlingit Tribe. The Yakutat Tlingit Tribe agreement involves both Wrangell-St. Elias and Glacier Bay National Parks. Glacier Bay National Park also has a government-to-government relationship with the Huna Tlingit Tribe.

Tatshenshini-Alsek Park was established by the Province of British Columbia as a Class A park by an enactment of the provincial legislature and is managed under the Parks Act and the Protected Areas of British Columbia Act and associated regulations. In 1996, the Champagne-Aishihik First Nations (CAFN) and the Government of British Columbia signed the bi-lateral Tatshenshini-Alsek Park Management Agreement, which, in part, directed CAFN and British Columbia Parks to jointly manage Tatshenshini-Alsek Park.

Management goals and objectives for the property have been developed through management plans for each individual protected area, specifically: the Kluane National Park and Reserve Management Plan (2010); the Wrangell-St. Elias National Park and Preserve General Management Plan (1986); the Glacier Bay National Park and Preserve General Management Plan (1984); and the Management Direction Statement (2000) for Tatshenshini-Alsek Park. Although management of each component of the property is directed by an individual management plan, there are a number of guiding principles related to natural and cultural resource management, visitor use and interpretation, science and research and relations with Aboriginal peoples that are common to all of the plans, reflecting strong cooperation among the property managers. The management plans and their associated goals and objectives are periodically reviewed and updated with First Nation, Native Alaskan, public, stakeholder and partner input, direction and advice.

Special attention will be given over the long term to monitoring and taking appropriate actions related to a number of factors in and near the property. Specifically, attention will focus on monitoring aquatic resources and forest and tundra ecosystem health. Park authorities manage or monitor human use, including visitation; infrastructure development; solid waste management; impacts of climate change; wildlife populations; biological and physical resource use; ecological disturbances such as fire; impacts from sudden geological events; and the potential for invasive or hyper-abundant species.

Notes

Extension of the "Glacier Bay/Wrangell/St Elias/Kluane" property.

Property inscribed for both geological and ecological values under natural criterion N (ii) before 1994. Criterion N (i) [Operational Guidelines 2002] was added. For more details see Decision 30.COM 8D.1.
Links
Canadian Sites on the World Heritage List

Kluane National Park and Reserve of Canada

Tatshenshini-Alsek Park

World Heritage in the United States

Glacier Bay National Park and Preserve

Wrangell-St. Elias National Park and Preserve

Protectedplanet.net

Activities 1
World Heritage Marine Programme
News  9
Marine World Heritage: 50 Beacons of Hope in a changing ocean
9 March 2020
Glacier Bay and West Norwegian Fjords sign Partnership Agreement
11 September 2019
Marine World Heritage-inspired artwork to celebrate World Oceans Day
8 June 2018
Spearheading a global conservation movement: Marine World Heritage 2018 annual report
6 February 2018
More add
Events  1
4th World Heritage Marine Managers Conference
4 Sep 2019 - 9 Sep 2019
Media
play_arrow Kluane / Wrangell-St Elias / Glacier Bay / Tatshenshini-Alsek (UNESCO/NHK)
play_arrow NHK World Heritage 100 Series
play_arrow UNESCO Marine World Heritage and COVID-19 (Part II)
play_arrow UNESCO’s Marine World Heritage
Canada
United States of America
Date of Inscription: 1979
Significant modifications to the boundaries : 1992, 1994
Criteria: (vii)(viii)(ix)(x)
Property : 9,839,121 ha

Dossier: 72ter
Kluane: Yukon Territory (Canada) and Alaska (USA) Glacier Bay: Alaska (USA) Tatshenshini: Province of British Columbia (Canada)
N61 11 51.3 W140 59 31.1
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

1993
Protections
by other conservation instruments

2 protections / 2 elements

Biosphere Reserves (1 element)

Glacier Bay-Admiralty Island
RAMSAR (1 element)

Glacier Bay-Admiralty Is.

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026