World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Forest Massif of Odzala-Kokoua
Forest Massif of Odzala-Kokoua
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Assistance
Forest Massif of Odzala-Kokoua
This property is an excellent example, at an exceptionally large-scale, of the process of post-glacial forest recolonization of savanna ecosystems. It is therefore ecologically significant as a convergence point of multiple ecosystem types (Congolese Forest, Lower Guinean Forest and Savanna). The broad range of age classifications across the forest succession spectrum contributes to the park’s highly distinct ecology, incorporating a broad range of remarkable ecological processes. It is one of the most important strongholds for forest elephants in Central Africa, and is recognized as the park with the richest primate diversity in the region.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The Forest Massif of Odzala-Kokoua (FMOK) is the largest protected area in the transition zone between the Atlantic or Lower Guinean region and the Congolese region (1,179,376 ha), with, however, a preponderance of Lower Guinean affinities. It is nestled in the heart of a vast forest ecosystem spanning 4.7 million hectares. The property constitutes an exceptional representation of the process of forest recolonization over savanna, with, in particular, vast areas of highly diverse Marantaceae forests with a preponderance of Lower Guinean affinities. Two-thirds of the property's habitats represent very different stages and ages of this recolonization process. In addition, the escarpment of Etokou is home to saxicolous and mist forests, ecosystems that are not known to occur elsewhere in northern Congo. The fauna within the property is virtually complete, and its forest ecosystem remains fully functional.

Criterion (ix): The forest ecosystem is characterized by its great diversity of formations of very different ages over an enormous area. The property represents all stages of the savanna-to-forest succession process. Marantaceae forests cover around 60% of the property. These forests are highly diversified, representing both progressive succession stages, as seen in other sites in west-central Africa, and regressive stages where mature forests are invaded by the highly aggressive Marantaceae species Haumania liebrechtsiana. The forest dynamics within FMOK are driven by complex and still insufficiently understood ecological processes. The presence of more than 130 marshy clearings maintained by wildlife is not exceptional in itself, but contributes greatly to the significance of the property. These clearings function as vital exchange hubs for nutrients and play a critical role in determining the movements of elephants, which are essential agents of forest dynamics. Moreover, this forest ecosystem, with predominant Lower Guinean affinities, is highly representative of the forests within the Sangha interval and, more specifically, of the advancing front of Lower Guinean forests as they reclaim savanna areas. This virtually untouched forest ecosystem helps to preserve the integrity of the waters of the Mambili basin, and thus the vast interface between terrestrial and aquatic environments.

Criterion (x): The FMOK's intact forest ecosystem is home to little-studied forest formations, including old-growth, saxicolous and mist forests. These mist forests are unique to northern Congo and the Sangha interval, and they provide habitat for at least 32 plant species that are not found elsewhere in the region, including one endemic species. In all, 1,150 plant species have been identified, of which four are endemic and 15 are classified as threatened to varying degrees.

In terms of fauna, this ecosystem supports at least 120 species of mammals. These include 20 threatened species and 17 primate species, including 9 species endemic or sub-endemic to Lower Guinea. The populations of 6,246 forest elephants, 11,481 gorillas, and 2,240 chimpanzees represent significant strongholds for the conservation of these threatened species. Notably, the only known population of forest-dwelling spotted hyenas in the Congo Basin occurs within the property. In terms of avian diversity, 463 bird species have been recorded, including 64% of the 278 forest species restricted to the Guinean-Congolese region, or 88% of the Guineo-Congolian bird species documented in Congo, two of the six endemic species of Lower Guinea and four threatened species. The insect fauna includes at least 647 species of diurnal butterflies, featuring one locally endemic species, numerous sub-endemic species of Lower Guinea, and several species that appear to be confined to the region’s Marantaceae forests. Lastly, the FMOK is also home to significant populations of threatened long-snouted crocodiles, dwarf crocodiles and two endemic fish species.

Integrity

The FMOK forest ecosystem spans 1,179,376 ha, and is further safeguarded by a buffer zone, bringing the total area to 5,386,236 ha. The property itself is almost 100% intact. The buffer zone (4,206,860 ha) includes the eco-development zone of Odzala-Kokoua National Park (PNOK) (187,843 ha), forestry concessions on the immediate periphery of the park (3,640,514 ha), the Lossi Gorilla Sanctuary (35,000 ha), and a section of the Espace TRIDOM Interzone Congo (ETIC) (343,503 ha). The forests in this buffer zone are all sustainably managed or FSC-certified. These areas support a human population of around 40,000 inhabitants.

Mining operations on the outskirts of the FMOK have resulted in mercury contamination of the Lékoli river. Extreme vigilance is therefore required in this area. However, due to its substantial size, slightly accentuated but present relief, dense hydrographic network, phytogeographic ecological gradients, and its large buffer zone, the FMOK ecosystem possesses the resilience needed to withstand future development projects in northern Congo, population expansion, and anticipated climate change impacts. Nevertheless, it is important to avoid potential threats stemming from large-scale development and resource extraction, which could compromise the property’s exceptional integrity.

Protection and management requirements

Apart from activities essential to management, research and tourism, no extractive activities are permitted. Rigorous surveillance measures must be implemented to prevent illegal mining and to require mining companies to perform the mandatory environmental impact assessments for any proposed industrial activities, while ensuring that no mining projects are authorized within the property. Poaching represents the most immediate and pressing threat to the property. Effective anti-poaching strategies, including targeted measures to combat ivory trafficking, are imperative. Alongside the anti-poaching campaign, regular monitoring of the actions taken, the results obtained, and the site’s conditions, is organised. Population estimates for elephants and great apes, as well as surveys of illegal human activities, are conducted at intervals of three to five years.

All these activities are codified by law, mainly by the decree creating the PNOK, Law 37-2008 of November 28, 2008 on wildlife and protected areas, and the Forestry Code. These legal provisions incorporate considerations for peripheral local communities and Indigenous Peoples. In their recognition, a designated “community development zone” has been established, which is managed through participatory mapping initiatives. Guaranteeing the rights and livelihoods of local communities and Indigenous Peoples is a fundamental requirement for the protection and effective management of the property. The management of the property must be based on the principle of free, prior, and informed consent of Indigenous Peoples, in accordance with the Operational Guidelines.

Finally, the FMOK is surrounded by a 4,206,860-ha buffer zone, comprising sustainably managed and certified forestry concessions. Agreements have been or must be established with these concessions to coordinate anti-poaching efforts. This vast buffer zone of forest concessions extends the forest habitats accessible to species with large home ranges, serves as a protective barrier that isolates the FMOK from various external pressures, and safeguards these forests from being exploited for other uses.

News  1
2023: A new important step in the protection and promotion of Africa's World Heritage
9 October 2023
Congo
Date of Inscription: 2023
Criteria: (ix)(x)
Property : 1,179,376 ha

Buffer zone: 4,206,860 ha
Dossier: 692rev
N1 20 8 E14 51 37
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

Protections
by other conservation instruments

2 protections / 2 elements

Biosphere Reserves (1 element)

Odzala
RAMSAR (1 element)

Site Ramsar Odzala Kokoua

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026