World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Pantanal Conservation Area
Pantanal Conservation Area
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Assistance
Pantanal Conservation Area

The Pantanal Conservation Area consists of a cluster of four protected areas with a total area of 187,818 ha. Located in western central Brazil at the south-west corner of the State of Mato Grosso, the site represents 1.3% of Brazil's Pantanal region, one of the world's largest freshwater wetland ecosystems. The headwaters of the region's two major river systems, the Cuiabá and the Paraguay rivers, are located here, and the abundance and diversity of its vegetation and animal life are spectacular.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief Synthesis

The Pantanal Conservation Area comprises a cluster of four contiguous protected areas: the Pantanal Matogrossense National Park and the Special Reserves of Acurizal, Penha and Doroche, covering a total area of 187,818 hectares. This protected area complex is located in western central Brazil, in the extreme south-west of the Mato Grosso e Mato Grosso do Sul State and the international border with Bolivia and Paraguay.

The property includes the greater part of the Amolar mountainous ridge with a maximum altitude of 900 meters. The transition between the seasonally flooded areas and the mountains is abrupt. This ecological gradient is unique to the whole Pantanal region and offers a dramatic landscape. Located between the river basins of Cuiabá and Paraguay, the site plays a key role in the spreading of nutritive materials during flooding as well as in the maintenance of fish stocks in the Pantanal. Although the property only covers a small part of the Pantanal (one of the largest wetlands of the world, covering around 14,000,000 ha), it is representative and of sufficient size to ensure the continuity of ecological processes. It also protects numerous threatened species, such as the giant armadillo, giant anteater, giant otter, marsh deer and the hyacinth macaw, the largest species of parrot. The jaguar population in the property is probably the biggest in the entire Pantanal region. The number of aquatic plant species found there is also remarkable.

Criterion (vii): The spectacular landscape of the wetlands of the property bordered by the Amolar mountainous chain originates in the combination of steep cliffs with annual hydrological extremes. During the rainy season, between October to April, the rivers overspill and flood vast regions, leaving only small areas inundated. At the end of this period, the waters slowly descend leaving numerous small temporary lakes. This outstanding landscape gives the Pantanal an unique aestheticism, enriched by the abundance and diversity of the wild flora and fauna. For example, it is remarkable to see a group of giant water lilies, impressive aquatic plants, growing near to immense cactus from semi-arid regions.

Criterion (ix): On a reduced scale, this site is a model for ongoing ecological and biological processes in the Pantanal. Considered as a phytogeographic region, the Pantanal is strongly influenced by neighbouring ecosystems (mainly those of the Cerrado and the Amazon, but also those of the Chaquenha and the Atlantic). This group, associating the Amolar Mountain chain with the wetland ecosystems, benefits from a major and unique ecological gradient in the region, contributing to the maintenance of the biological process. The hydrographic network permits the migration of species between the river basins forming the Pantanal, where a vast diversity of fish transit during their initial growing stage. These water courses also play a central role in diversing nutrients to the entire basin. During flood periods, a part of the fauna (notably the largest mammals) migrate from the plain to the higher, drier regions, and during the more severe drought periods, the plain can be the only area in the region to remain humid, thus playing a precious role in the maintenace of the fauna.

Criterion (x):The Pantanal is extremely important for the conservation of biological diversity and the property contains representative habitats comprising around 80 species of mammals, 650 species of birds, 50 of reptiles and 300 of fish (thus the Reserve is vital for the maintenance of fish stock). Several worldwide threatened species are present here, including the giant armadillo,(Priodontesmaximus), the giant anteater (Myrmecophagatridactyla), giant otter (Pteronurabrasiliensis), marsh deer (Blastocerus dichotomus) and the hyacinth macaw (Anodorhynchus hyacinthinus), the largest species of parrot. A healthy jaguar population (Panthera onca), a species almost threatened with extinction, is also present. Furthermore, the region contains a remarkable diversity of aquatic plants.

Integrity

The size of the Pantanal Conservation Area is clearly defined and sufficient for the maintenance of important ecological and biological processes for the conservation of long-term biological diversity. The level of fragility of the Pantanal is high and the effects of human practices (dredging, excessive fishing, deforestation, acute erosion, waste waters, waste materials, dams generating hydrodynamic changes, canalling of water courses) represent serious threats to the whole region. The Pantanal National Park and the Dorochê Reserve are directly affected by negative human activities. The Acurizal and Penha Reserves are less subject to these effects but their flood regions are however affected by these impacts.

It should be noted that around the proposed site, several private abandoned properties could ensure additional protection to the property. The integrity of the site would be improved if a larger area could be obtained for inclusion in the property.

Protection and management requirements

The National Park and the Special Reserves are protected by federal government decrees. The Pantanal Matogrossense National Park enjoys the strictest integral protection. The Special Reserves are inscribed by federal decree recognizing their permanent management for conservation. The Chico Mendes Institute for Biodiversty Conservation (ICMBio), responsible for the management of the National Park, is an autonomous federal body attached to the Ministry for Environment. The Park has an Emergency Action Plan prepared in 1994 and a Research Plan in 1997; its management plan dates from 2004. The Special Reserves are managed by the Ecotropica Foundation that implements a management plan since 1998. An integrated management plan for all the components of the property is advisable.

This property, entitled « Pantanal Conservation Area », is in fact a very small part of a vast ecosystem. For example, the northern part of the Pantanal is very different, thus this property is not entirely representative of the whole Pantanal. Now that the « mosaics » tool has entered into force in the Brazilian legislation to improve the conservation of its natural resources, it would be advisable to review this property to examine how the « Pantanal Conservation Area » could be extended to form a transboundary property with parts of the same ecosystem located on the territory of neighbouring countries.

The long-term integrity of the property depends on the maintenance of the hydrological regime of the Pantanal complex. The plans for the construction of navigable water courses in the region or other similar projects represent a real threat to the entire Pantanal. This type of large-scale project would change the natural dynamics and structure of the water flow in the basin, and moreover the massive absorption capacity of flood waters in the Pantanal followed by its slow descent.

There is a need to develop sustainable ecological economic activities, and to monitor the preparation of programmes attracting tourists to the Pantanal in advance. Problems such as illegal sport fishing, disturbance of nesting areas and requests for deluxe items (source of pollution) require strict control. Although poaching of wild animals and its illegal commerce has been controlled within the property, pressure on species such as the caiman, jaguars and parrots continues outside the property.

Various scientific research and environmental educational activities are encouraged and developed in the cluster of protected areas. All the components of the property are part of the Biosphere Reserve and the National Park is, furthermore, recognized as a Ramsar site. The Brazilian environmental policy encourages participation by organized civil society and public-private partnerships, through committees assisting in the management of the protected areas.
Links
Programa Pantanal (Mato Grosso do Sul) (portuguese only)

Panatanal - Sanctuário Ecológico (portuguese only)

Protectedplanet.net

Activities 1
Rapid Response Facility (RRF)
News  7
UNESCO strengthens fire resilience in the Pantanal and Cerrado with support from local communities
22 July 2025
Nearly Three-Quarters of World Heritage Sites Are at High Risk from Water-Related Hazards
1 July 2025
Unprecedented fires fueled by climate change threaten iconic World Heritage forests
24 June 2025
UNESCO provides crucial support to biodiversity in emergency situations
31 March 2021
More add
Media
play_arrow Pantanal Conservation Area (UNESCO/NHK)
Brazil
Date of Inscription: 2000
Criteria: (vii)(ix)(x)
Property : 187,818 ha

Dossier: 999
Southwest of the State of Mato Grosso and Northwest of the State of Mato Grosso do Sul, adjacent to the Brazil/Bolivian borders
S17 39 21.6 W57 21 32.4
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2025 2023 2021
Protections
by other conservation instruments

2 protections / 2 elements

Biosphere Reserves (1 element)

Pantanal
RAMSAR (1 element)

Pantanal Matogrossense

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026