World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Litomyšl Castle
Litomyšl Castle
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Litomyšl Castle

Litomyšl Castle was originally a Renaissance arcade-castle of the type first developed in Italy and then adopted and greatly developed in central Europe in the 16th century. Its design and decoration are particularly fine, including the later High-Baroque features added in the 18th century. It preserves intact the range of ancillary buildings associated with an aristocratic residence of this type.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief Synthesis

The Litomyšl Castle is an outstanding example of an arcaded Renaissance country residence, a type of structure first invented in Italy and then developed in the Czech Lands to create a mature form with special architectural value. Situated at an important communications junction on the main route between Bohemia and Moravia, in the Pardubice region, Litomyšl was a fortified centre on the hill where the castle now stands.

The work on the Renaissance building began in 1568 under the supervision of Jan Baptista Avostalis (Giovanni Battista Avostalli), who was soon joined by his brother Oldřich (Ulrico). Most of the work had been completed by 1580. The castle interior underwent alterations between 1792 and 1796, based on the designs of Jan Kryštof Habich, but he was careful to preserve the fine building’s Renaissance appearance with impressive gables.

The castle is a four-winged, three-storeyed structure with an asymmetrical disposition. The western wing is the largest, whereas the southern wing is a two-storeyed arcaded gallery, closing the second square courtyard (a feature that is unique to Litomyšl). The groin-vaulted arcading continues around the western and eastern sides of the courtyard. The south-eastern corner of the eastern wing contains the castle chapel. One of the most striking features in the interior of the castle consists in the fine neoclassical theatre from 1796-97 in the western wing. The original painted decoration of the auditorium, stage decorations and stage machinery have survived intact. The house has richly decorated interiors, basically Renaissance in form and with lavish late Baroque or neoclassical ornamentation in the form of elaborate plasterwork and wall and ceiling paintings.

The buildings associated with the castle were all built or rebuilt during the course of the modifications that the castle itself underwent over time, and this is reflected in their architectural styles. Among the ancillary buildings, the most interesting is the Brewery, the birthplace of Bedřich Smetana, one of the greatest Czech composers of all time. It lies to the south of the first courtyard. Originally constructed to complement the castle, with Renaissance sgraffito decoration, it was remodelled by the well-known architect František Maximilián Kaňka after the 1728 fire and received what is its present appearance. The ensemble also includes the former French formal garden with its saletta (pavilion) in the Baroque style and an 18th-century English-style park.

Criterion (ii): Litomyšl Castle is an outstanding and immaculately preserved example of the arcaded castle, a type of building first developed in Italy and modified in the Czech Lands to create an evolved form of special architectural quality.

Criterion (iv): Litomyšl Castle illustrates in an exceptional way the aristocratic residences of central Europe in the Renaissance and their subsequent development under the influence of new artistic movements.

Integrity

All the key elements which the outstanding universal value of the property is based upon, e.g. the former aristocratic residence, the garden, the entrance courtyard and the outbuildings, are located within its boundaries. Its delimitation and size are appropriate. None of the physical attributes of the property are under threat. The castle has retained all of its original features (the integrity of the ensemble and the ground plan of the main building), its high artistic quality (the formal logic of the three-storeyed arcaded galleries, the scenic sgraffiti, the “Late Baroque Classical” interior decoration) and the relation of the ensemble to its urban setting. The vistas have also been preserved. The buffer zone is delimited; it consists of a declared urban heritage reservation and its protective zone, which both have stabilized urban structures.

Authenticity

The authenticity of the property is high. The individual components remain physically integrated with one another in their original state, whilst the complex retains its spatial relationship with its historic urban setting. The successive modifications and conservation works that have taken place over several hundred years have been respected. No attempt has been made to select a particular period to display, but instead the organic evolution is presented in its entirety. The current form and appearance, including the floors with open Renaissance arcades in the courtyard and sgraffito decorations on the facades and on the gables, are defined by the original design. Restoration works have been performed using the materials and historical techniques that complied with international standards for heritage conservation. 

Protection and management requirements

The property is protected under Act No. 20/1987 Coll. on State Heritage Preservation as amended as a designated national cultural heritage site. It thus enjoys the highest degree of legal protection. The buffer zone of the property consists of the historic centre of the town, which is designated as an urban heritage reservation and has a protective zone itself. On the territory of the property and of its buffer zone, no change in the urban area is planned.

Sustainable use of ancillary buildings is the main goal of the completed Castle Hill Revitalization project, which also includes some contemporary, however reversible, architectural interventions within the property. Key long-term issues of the main castle building (inadequate use or incipient deterioration of particular parts) are being addressed by newly drafted project reflecting also Castle Hill Revitalization experience.

The responsibility for the property management is shared by the state through National Heritage Institute and the City of Litomyšl, which are responsible for the maintenance, protection and promotion of the property. The management plan of the property is under preparation. Financial instruments for the conservation of the property include grant schemes and funding through the programme of the Ministry of Culture of the Czech Republic allocated to the maintenance and conservation of the immovable cultural heritage, as well as financial resources allocated from other public budgets. Maintenance of the property is carried out in accordance with a planned schedule.

Since 2000, annual monitoring reports have been prepared at the national level to serve the World Heritage site manager, the Ministry of Culture, the National Heritage Institute and other agencies involved.

Links
Zamek Litomyšl

www.litomysl.cz/zamek/

Litomyšl

News  1
World Heritage Committee Inscribes 48 New Sites on Heritage List
2 December 1999
Media
play_arrow Litomyšl Castle (UNESCO/NHK)
Czechia
Date of Inscription: 1999
Criteria: (ii)(iv)
Property : 4.25 ha

Buffer zone: 118.13 ha
Dossier: 901
Pardubice Region
N49 52 24.996 E16 18 51.984
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026