World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Cordouan Lighthouse
Cordouan Lighthouse
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Cordouan Lighthouse
The Lighthouse of Cordouan rises up on a shallow rocky plateau in the Atlantic Ocean at the mouth of the Gironde estuary in the Nouvelle-Aquitaine region, in a highly exposed and hostile environment. Built in white limestone dressed blocks at the turn of the 16th and 17th centuries, it was designed by engineer Louis de Foix and remodelled by engineer Joseph Teulère in the late 18th century. A masterpiece of maritime signalling, Cordouan’s monumental tower is decorated with pilasters, columns modillions and gargoyles. It embodies the great stages of the architectural and technological history of lighthouses and was built with the ambition of continuing the tradition of famous beacons of antiquity, illustrating the art of building lighthouses in a period of renewed navigation, when beacons played an important role as territorial markers and as instruments of safety. Finally, the increase of its height, in the late 18th century, and the changes to its light chamber, attest to the progress of science and technology of the period. Its architectural forms drew inspiration from ancient models, Renaissance Mannerism and the specific architectural language of France’s engineering school École des Ponts et Chaussées.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Erected in the open sea on a rocky plateau where the Atlantic Ocean meets the Gironde Estuary, in a highly exposed and hostile environment that is hazardous for shipping, which is also its raison-d’être, Cordouan Lighthouse has been a beacon for ships engaged in trade between Bordeaux and the rest of the world since the 16th century.

Its monumental tower in limestone dressed blocks, decorated with pilasters, columns and sculptures, has 8 levels that rise to a height of 67 metres above sea level. It is the result of two complementary construction campaigns in the 16th and then the 18th century to enhance the technical capacities of the lighthouse, which is still in use today. The Cordouan Lighthouse was conceived from the outset as a monument, both in its stylistic features and expression, and in the engineering techniques employed.

Initial construction was undertaken in 1584 by engineer Louis de Foix, at the behest of the king of France, Henri III. Henri IV, eager to stress his legitimacy, commissioned original and unexpected features at the frontier of his kingdom: apartments for the king and a chapel. A concrete expression of political will intended to impress all the European sea powers and local communities, the Cordouan Lighthouse thus became a monumental lighthouse dedicated to the affirmation of the king’s power. The height of the lighthouse was raised in 1788-1789 by engineer Joseph Teulère, who remained true to the original conception and remodelled the lighthouse in keeping with the architectural form invented in the 16th century by Louis de Foix.

Not only is the form exceptional, but also the quality of the style. The tower of Louis de Foix clearly reflects the influence of antiquity and Italy, evoking in the open sea the forms of Roman mausoleums, and the domes and most elegant features of Renaissance mannerism. Joseph Teulère, to his credit, achieved a masterpiece of French stereotomy in the language of late-18th century neoclassicism.

Cordouan Lighthouse, in its intentional monumentality, is a grandiose and unique creation, in which the human genius is not only architectural, stylistic and technical, but also symbolic and conceptual.

Criterion (i): The Cordouan Lighthouse is a masterpiece of maritime signalling, which has remained in use from the 17th century until today. Since it was first built, this lighthouse has represented a symbolic endowment to the glory of the King of France of the time. In the 18th century, Joseph Teulère heightened and strengthened the lighthouse. The masterly application of the stereometry and stereotomy has allowed for a superb integration between the existing fabric and the new addition, which confirmed also its symbolic function. The aggressive natural environment it was erected in consolidates the status of this building as an eminent example of artistic, technical and technological human ingenuity.

Criterion (iv): The Cordouan Lighthouse embodies in an outstanding manner the great stages of the history of lighthouses. It was built with the ambition to continue the tradition of famous beacons of antiquity and illustrates the art of building lighthouses in a period of renewed navigation between the 16th and the 17th centuries, when beacons played an important role as territorial markers and as instruments of safety. Finally, the increase of its height, in the late 18th century, and the changes to its light chamber, attest to the progress made by science and technology of the period. Thanks to its fame, the Cordouan Lighthouse witnessed several experiments to improve lighthouses’ capacity to assist navigation.

Integrity

The conditions of integrity of Cordouan Lighthouse are very good. The monumental nature of its appearance has, in line with the conception of Louis de Foix, always guided the architectural and technical interventions necessary for its maritime signalling function. The raising of the height of the frustoconical tower in the 18th century by engineer Joseph Teulère, although it changed the original outline, respected the conception of the initial lighthouse by maintaining the symbolic significance of its guiding principles, with the chapel and the king’s apartments. Its monumentality in isolation is a key element of the integrity of Cordouan Lighthouse.

Authenticity

Cordouan Lighthouse is structurally authentic and continues to be used for its original function. Its authenticity cannot be understood without taking into account its geographical situation in an extreme maritime and meteorological environment, which makes constant renovations essential. Its authenticity must also be assessed in the light of its role as an active maritime signalling unit, requiring regular technical adaptations. Similarly, the restorations in the 19th and 20th centuries have had only a slight impact on the authenticity of the lighthouse with the addition of the annular buildings and the restoration of the interior spaces. The monument has thus retained its strong visual and symbolic presence, while undergoing a process of technical modernisation in order to maintain its activity.

Protection and management requirements

Classified as a Historic Monument since 1862, Cordouan Lighthouse, a state property, is supported by conservation measures funded and directly implemented by the Ministry of Culture. The property is thus protected under the Code du Patrimoine, Code de l’Environnement and Code général de la propriété des personnes publiques (Environment and Heritage Codes, and General Code on Public Property). Maintaining and managing the functional elements of the lighthouse are the responsibility of the Inter-Regional Directorate of the Mer Sud-Atlantique. The whole of the property – except for Cordouan Lighthouse itself – is located in the Parc Naturel Marin de l’Estuaire de la Gironde et de la Mer des Pertuis and is thus covered by the natural park’s management plan. Lastly, the Domaine public maritime inside which the property is located (except for the lighthouse itself) is protected by a principle of non-constructability, and only small-scale works may be carried out, subject to authorisations relating to the use of public property.

The property buffer zone on the land is covered by various conservation, protection, enhancement and planning measures (Coastline law, Historic monuments, Classified and inscribed sites, Outstanding heritage sites, SCoTs and PLUs) which contribute, under the terms of the Heritage Code and Environment Code, to the preservation of the environment and landscape of the property. The development of a landscape plan is stated in the management plan. The parts of the buffer zone in the sea are covered by the same measures as the natural elements located within the boundaries of the property.

The lighthouse is today the responsibility of the Ministry of Ecological and Solidarity-based Transition, while the natural elements of the property form part of the maritime public domain. The SMIDDEST (Syndicat mixte pour le Développement durable de l’Estuaire de la Gironde) has developed a project for the management, tourist enhancement and promotion of the Cordouan site, and organises paid visits to the lighthouse, to the spaces included in the project, and to the plateau surrounding the site. The SMIDDEST is also required to ensure that the site is guarded, to prevent any vandalism or damage to the built structure, and any damage to the fauna and flora of the natural elements.

The management framework revolves around an envisaged Local Commission for World Heritage, which is expected to supersede the pilot local commission set up for the nomination. The efficiency, effectiveness and good results of the Management Plan depend on a constant, strong and continuously-tuned coordination among all the involved authorities, organisations and technical bodies. The role of the “Commission locale du patrimoine mondial”, and in particular of SMIDDEST is thus essential. A management plan has been developed on the basis of objectives and actions planned by all key actors: a formal commitment by all relevant parties to implement its provision will strengthen the management system in place.

Links
Cordouan Lighthouse

News  1
Five sites in the Arab and Europe regions inscribed on UNESCO’s World Heritage List
24 July 2021
France
Date of Inscription: 2021
Criteria: (i)(iv)
Property : 23,582 ha

Buffer zone: 139,615 ha
Dossier: 1625
N45 35 10.7 W1 10 24
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026