World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Hospicio Cabañas, Guadalajara
Hospicio Cabañas, Guadalajara
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Hospicio Cabañas, Guadalajara

The Hospicio Cabañas was built at the beginning of the 19th century to provide care and shelter for the disadvantaged – orphans, old people, the handicapped and chronic invalids. This remarkable complex, which incorporates several unusual features designed specifically to meet the needs of its occupants, was unique for its time. It is also notable for the harmonious relationship between the open and built spaces, the simplicity of its design, and its size. In the early 20th century, the chapel was decorated with a superb series of murals, now considered some of the masterpieces of Mexican art. They are the work of José Clemente Orozco, one of the greatest Mexican muralists of the period.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief Synthesis

Located in Guadalajara in the central region of western Mexico, Hospicio Cabañas was founded at the beginning of the 19th century to provide care and shelter to the needy including orphans, elderly, handicapped and chronic invalids. Architect Manuel Tolsá, designed a predominantly Neoclassical complex on a monumental scale, covering 2.34 hectares. Despite its size, the hospice’s uniqueness relates primarily to the simplicity of its design, specifically its dimensions and the harmony achieved between the buildings and the outdoor spaces. The overall composition is formed by a rectangular plan measuring 164 metres by 145 metres and contains a complex of single-story buildings laid out around a series of twenty-three courtyards varying in size and characteristics.

The hospice’s founder, Bishop Cabañas commissioned a design that responded to its social and economic requirements through an outstanding solution of great subtlety and humanity. The single-storey scale, covered passageways between buildings, and arcades traversing most courtyards focused on the comfort of its residents allowing them to move freely. The light and air provided by the open spaces were intended to promote healing. In addition, it was one of Bishop Cabañas’ objectives to educate residents through the learning of a trade. For example, the hospice’s corridors provided space for one of Guadalajara’s first printing press workshops and throughout the 19th century innumerable texts were published from this location.

The exception to the complex’s uniform height of 7.5 metres is found in along its central axis with the chapel and kitchen. The kitchen is topped by a saucer dome and small lantern. It is the chapel, however, that is the visually dominant feature of the hospice with its imposing dome rising 32.5 metres.

In the late 1930s, the chapel was ornamented with fifty-seven superb frescoes painted by José Clemente Orozco, one of the greatest Mexican muralists of the time. These works are considered a great masterpiece of Mexican art and illustrate both Spanish culture as well as Mexico’s indigenous culture with gods, sacrifices and temples. The focus of the murals is found in the chapel’s dome with the work El Hombre de Fuego (The Man of Fire) which represents the submission of humans to machines.

Currently, the hospice is the home of the Cabañas Cultural Institute and the Cultural Heritage of Humanity. A buffer zone of 18 urban blocks measuring 37.26 hectares surrounds the complex bounded by Federacion Street in the north, Javier Mina in the south, Mariano Jiménez in the east and on the west Calzada Independencia.

Criterion (i):The Hospicio Cabañas is a unique architectural complex designed to respond to social and economic requirements for housing the sick, the aged, orphans, and the needy with an outstanding solution of great subtlety and humanity. The murals painted in the chapel by José Clemente Orozco are considered great masterpieces of Mexican art.

Criterion (ii): The group of paintings in the chapel of the Hospicio, in particular the allegory El Hombre de Fuego (The Man of Fire)  is considered to be one of the masterpieces of 20th century mural painting and had profound cultural influence beyond the American continent.

Criterion (iii): This is a unique building dedicated to public welfare assistance and speaks of the exceptional humanitarian spirit of its promoter and producer Bishop Juan Ruiz de Cabañas.

Criterion (iv): The Hospicio Cabañas is an outstanding work of renowned architect Manuel Tolsá, built predominantly in the Neoclassical style, that provided a completely different architectural solution to the conventional design of its time. The restriction of one level to facilitate movement of patients, large open spaces with natural lighting and ventilation to promote healing, and covered walkways between the different modules of the building, whose scale, covering 2.34 hectares, was at that time and still is today considered monumental.

Integrity 

The original plan of architect Manuel Tolsá remains intact as the property includes the entire 2.34 hectare complex of buildings designed to house the Hospicio Cabañas. With the exception of the kitchen garden, which was divided into forty plots and bisected by two roads in the 1850s, there has been almost no later addition. At the time of inscription, a management plan was being prepared that included a buffer zone of 37.26 hectares surrounding the complex.

The property is in an earthquake prone area and as a result, seismic reinforcing has been undertaken to protect the buildings, particularly in the columns and artwork in the chapel.

Authenticity

The authenticity of the complex of the Hospicio Cabañas is high. Although no longer a hospice, its current use as the home of the Cabañas Cultural Institute and the Cultural Heritage of Humanity has required minimal change to the design. Modifications included the removal of walls to create a large conference room or theatre to house 199 people. Since 1996, work has been done to reverse changes to the kitchen wing dating from the early 20th century.

Some recent interventions that involved modern techniques and materials necessary for the preservation of the ensemble were carried out after thorough studies. An example of this work is the reinforcing of the roof construction with the replacement of original wooden beams by metal frameworks. Moreover, the columns supporting the chapel’s dome were also reinforced in recognition of the region’s seismic risks. Stabilisation of the murals was required in response to evidence of the plaster parting from the supporting walls.

Protection and management requirements

The property is currently owned by the State of Jalisco and managed by the Cabañas Cultural Institute. It is protected as an immoveable historic monument under the 1972 Federal Law on Archaeological, Artistic and Historical Monuments and Zones which imposes strict controls on interventions. Technical responsibility for its conservation and restoration is under the Ministry of Culture, Government of Jalisco with technical support from the National Institute of Anthropology and History (INAH) and the National Institute of Fine Arts (INBA), both part of the National Council for Culture and the Arts (CNCA) of the Ministry of Education.

The complex presently houses the Cabañas Cultural Institute, and the Cultural Heritage of Humanity. The current operation of the building requires a management plan methodology, in order to strengthen, support and consolidate the organization’s roles and responsibilities. The Cabañas Cultural Institute ’s role as contemporary museum, with both temporary and permanent exhibitions, as well as the show rooms for the works of Maestro. José Clemente Orozco. Both the murals and the building itself need to maintain the conditions of the museum space, in accordance with technical safety requirements and the conservation of collections, without affecting their heritage status.

An urban development plan (1997-98) provides protection for the inscribed property from the surrounding area. This document defines the buffer zone which includes 18 blocks and part of the Plaza Tapatia covering an area of 37.26 hectares.

Activities 1
Culture|2030 Indicators National Profile of the Mexico
News  1
World Heritage Committee Inscribes 46 New Sites on World Heritage List
7 December 1997
Media
play_arrow Hospicio Cabañas, Guadalajara (UNESCO/NHK)
Mexico
Date of Inscription: 1997
Criteria: (i)(ii)(iii)(iv)
Property : 2.34 ha

Buffer zone: 29.63 ha
Dossier: 815
Jalisco, Guadalajara
N20 40 36.797 W103 20 16.073
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026