World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Aflaj Irrigation Systems of Oman
Aflaj Irrigation Systems of Oman
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Aflaj Irrigation Systems of Oman

The property includes five aflaj irrigation systems and is representative of some 3,000 such systems still in use in Oman. The origins of this system of irrigation may date back to AD 500, but archaeological evidence suggests that irrigation systems existed in this extremely arid area as early as 2500 BC. Using gravity, water is channelled from underground sources or springs to support agriculture and domestic use. The fair and effective management and sharing of water in villages and towns is still underpinned by mutual dependence and communal values and guided by astronomical observations. Numerous watchtowers built to defend the water systems form part of the site reflecting the historic dependence of communities on the aflaj system. Threatened by falling level of the underground water table, the aflaj represent an exceptionally well-preserved form of land use.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The Aflaj Irrigation System of Oman is a serial property, with five individual component parts - Falaj Al Jeela, Falaj Muyasser, Falaj Daris, Falaj Malki and Falaj Khatmein. All of which are located in the north of Oman. Four cluster around the Al Jabal Al Akhdar mountain range, and the fifth is located in the Sharqi range. Together they represent more than 3,000 still functioning aflaj in Oman.

Hydrologically, the Aflaj are integrated systems which collect water (groundwater, natural spring water or surface water), and deliver it through channels (underground or surface) for domestic and agricultural purposes. They can be broadly divided into three types of hydrological systems reflecting their type of water-source - Aini, Daoudi and Ghaili.

The Aflaj contribute to a collection of cultural landscapes, that illustrate the evolution of human societies and settlements over time, within the physical constraints and/or opportunities presented by their natural environment, and of successive social, economic and cultural forces. These irrigation systems are components of interrelated and interdependent landscapes that developed as a result of water availability. The settlements and agricultural areas also represent traditional land uses which rely on water systems. This led to the advancement of traditional management structures and practices to manage the water supply. These systems were vital to the existence of the communities they supplied, but also required ongoing maintenance and investment from the communities.

Settlements could only be established in these locations because of the availability of water which is crucial as the local conditions are generally considered as   harsh, with little rainfall. Management of the water sources enabled the conversion of land to agricultural use (almost entirely dependent on irrigation), which in turn made permanent habitation possible. Settlement patterns were also largely driven by the demands and needs of agriculture, with watchtowers and forts located in defensive positions near or overlooking the sharia (distribution point) and falaj channels. Additionally, houses, tools and handicrafts are built from materials found on agricultural land.

The variety in the nature and size of the aflaj landscapes contained within the World Heritage property means that a wide range of building types and settlement patterns evolved to meet the diverse needs of the inhabitants. These included forts, fortified palaces, watchtowers, large multiple occupation houses, enclosed walled settlements, small individual family houses near agricultural plots, and temporary dwellings for use during the date harvest.

Falaj Al Jeela is an excellent example of a traditional falaj cultural landscape that continues to function today. Falaj Muyasser has highly authentic agricultural areas. It has the best-preserved traditional management practices of all the sites. It also makes a unique contribution to the range of building types within the property, with a particularly fine series of Beits. Falaj Daris has the largest range of building types and features of all property components. It is also an outstanding example of a cultural landscape that is millennia old, still in use today. Falaj Malki's landscape contains building types not found at any other site in the property. It is an outstanding example of a cultural landscape that is millennia old, still functioning to this day. Falaj Khatmein is an outstanding example of a coherent and inter-related cultural landscape and, with Falaj Al Jeela, it is the most intact, still functioning aflaj landscape. Specifically at this component, the falaj water is used for civic as well as agricultural purposes. The Falaj provides examples of building types and patterns that cannot be found elsewhere in the property.

The property demonstrates exceptionally inventive techniques of sustainable land use within a challenging natural environment. Without benefit of modern tools and equipment, the individual falaj systems carried water over many kilometres powered by gravity alone. Careful design overcame natural barriers - aqueducts and siphons transferred water across wadi beds and maintained water pressure, while falaj channels were carved into mountain sides. Settlement formation was adapted to meet natural constraints; when good agricultural land was scarce, settlements were located on mountain slopes and hill sides.

The aflaj in Oman are millennia old, but still play an active role in contemporary society, representing an outstanding example of a living, working landscape.  Despite the significant economic and technological developments that have taken place over the last 30 years, the water from the thousands of aflaj across the country still provides 30-50% of all the water used in Oman today.

This property is an exceptional example of community cooperation and traditional management practices, many still being used to manage the aflaj today. Water is divided among the local community on a time-share basis, encouraging collective interest in maintaining overall water levels. The time share is monitored at the community's sundial, then individual farms access the water at the appropriate time by a system of sluices. Variances in water levels are managed by increasing or reducing the size of the irrigated land as required, while a proportion of water and land is permanently set aside for the falaj itself, to raise funds for day-to-day management and maintenance.

Criterion (v): The collection of Aflaj irrigation systems represents some 3,000 still functioning systems in Oman. Ancient engineering technologies demonstrate long standing, sustainable use of water resources for the cultivation of palms and other produce in extremely arid desert lands. Such systems reflect the former total dependence of communities on this irrigation and a time-honoured, fair and effective management and sharing of water resources, underpinned by mutual dependence and communal values.

Integrity

The components of the property contain the key elements of the aflaj cultural landscapes (irrigation channels, agricultural land, settlement areas and traditional management practices), and the inter-relationships between them can be clearly seen, but to differing degrees at each individual site. The inscribed property reflects the integrity of the whole aflaj system.

Many agricultural and traditional settlement areas do survive, and are almost entirely free from modern interventions. Date palms continue to dominate the agricultural areas, and extant historic buildings generally retain their original building material.

There is also good continuity of use and function across the property, illustrative of it being a living, working cultural landscape. Across all sites, the key falaj channels continue to distribute water to irrigate agricultural land. The falaj system also continues to depend on traditional techniques and management practices - gravity continues to be the main engine driving falaj flow, some aqueducts and siphons continue to be used to transport water, water continues to be divided based on time share, and sluices continue to be used to allocate water to a particular farm at the appointed time.

While the water systems are maintained in good order, there are issues around the continued use and maintenance of many of the traditional buildings in these landscapes.  New development can compromise the setting of the Aflaj as well as increasing demand for water excessively, while palm plantations have sometimes been replaced by new houses.  Road construction across or alongside channels can be damaging.

Authenticity

The basic layout of the nominated aflaj is wholly authentic. There are some modern interventions such as the use of concrete for lining shafts, and cement for reinforcing the tops of the mother wells and access shafts, at some of the shari’a, and in the distribution channels to individual agricultural plots, and new building around the settlements. But the authenticity can be seen in the underground channels which still consist of old traditional materials. The authenticity of the management of the aflaj is incontrovertible. The traditional system of ownership and management functions efficiently and is complemented by the administrative, technical and financial support from the government The Aflaj provide examples of some of the old techniques of sustainable land use which still continues to this day. The agriculture system still functions using traditional methods. A wide range of old building settlements are constructed of traditional materials.

Protection and management requirements

The property is fully protected by legislation. In 2017 the law of organizing & protection of Aflaj (WHS) was issued by Royal decree No. (39/2017). Additional protection for the water system by the Water Protection Law was promulgated by Royal Decree No. 29/2000. The Royal Decree No. (39/2017) protects the entire Aflaj system, including the channels above and below ground from their source areas to the distribution of the water in the fields, the environment around the channels, the attributes of Outstanding Universal Value, buffer zone, the historic buildings, monuments, traditional practices and agricultural land within the property.

Other laws related to the stakeholders are: the environment around the channels is protected by the Law on protection of sources of potable water from pollution issued by royal Decree No. 115/2001. The historic buildings settlements are protected by the Law of Heritage Protection issued by the Decree No. 6/80. The agriculture is protected by the Law of Agriculture System issued by the Decree No. 48/2006. However, the traditional handicrafts in the Aflaj society are encourage and protected by the Public Authority for Handicrafts Industry which was established in 2003 by the Royal Decree No.35/2003.

The Management plan for The Aflaj was finished in 2009. A topographical survey was made for the five sites and the boundary of each site was exactly defined. The Masterplan for visitor centre and interpretation system have been executed. A specialist Section for the World Heritage property within the Department of the Aflaj was created in 2007. Traditional management systems are still strong and an important factor in the property’s successful management.

Links
Google Arts & Culture: Story

 View photos from OUR PLACE the World Heritage collection

News  2
International Day for Monuments and Sites 2021 - Complex Pasts: Diverse Futures
16 April 2021
Ancient irrigation system (Oman) and Palaces of Genoa (Italy) among ten new sites on World Heritage List
13 July 2006
Media
play_arrow Aflaj Irrigation Systems of Oman (UNESCO/NHK)
Oman
Date of Inscription: 2006
Criteria: (v)
Property : 1,455.949 ha

Buffer zone: 16,404.33 ha
Dossier: 1207
Serial: yes

Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2009 2007
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026