World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Djerba: Testimony to a settlement pattern in ...
Djerba: Testimony to a settlement pattern in an island territory
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Djerba: Testimony to a settlement pattern in an island territory
This serial property is a testimony to a settlement pattern that developed on the island of Djerba around the 9th century CE amidst the semi-dry and water-scarce environment. Low‑density was its key characteristic: it involved the division of the island into neighbourhoods, clustered together, that were economically self-sustainable, connected to each other and to the religious and trading places of the island, through a complex network of roads. Resulting from a mixture of environmental, socio-cultural and economic factors, the distinctive human settlement of Djerba demonstrates the way local people adapted their lifestyle to the conditions of their water-scarce natural environment.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The serial property of Djerba: Testimony to a settlement pattern in an island territory is an eminent example of spatial organization based on a dispersed settlement pattern and associated socio-economic system that evolved between the 9th and 18th centuries and reflected a symbiotic relationship between communities of diverse cultures and faiths who coexisted peacefully in Djerba and adapted their way of life to the conditions and restrictions of their water-scarce natural environment.

This distinctive human settlement pattern, which was neither totally urban nor totally rural, developed in response to a combination of environmental, socio-cultural and economic factors, and spread throughout the entire island. At the heart of this system was the combination of dispersed, low-density rural-type settlements (neighbourhoods organized according to the menzel-houma system, typical of the Ibadis, combining living quarters with family economic activities) and denser urban-type clusters (residential neighbourhoods inhabited by Jewish communities and the market district dedicated to commercial exchanges), which together formed a unique township on the island.

The houma (neighbourhood), made up of a number of menzel (family estates), was an economically self-sustaining entity that hosted agricultural and craft activities, representing on a small scale the social and economic organization of the island as a whole. The houma were linked to each other, as well as to the island's places of worship, the main trading centre and residential districts, by a complex network of roads.

Djerba's defensive orientation profoundly influenced its architecture. The massive houch (a dwelling unit) within the menzel was devoid of openings to the outside and flanked by angular towers. The island's many mosques were also designed with the ongoing insecurity in mind. With their short, squat shapes, arrow slits in the façades and crenelated terraces, they were often places of refuge and resistance. Several mosques dot the coastline, within earshot of each other, for surveillance and warning purposes and forming a first line of advanced defence; others, fortified and massive, form a second line of rear defence; still others, some troglodytic to serve primarily as refuges, were located further inland.

This traditional use of the island's territory, combined with the daily life of its inhabitants, guided by the imperative of defence and self-sufficiency, recalls the tumultuous periods of Djerba's thousand-year history, and today offers a remarkable illustration of the way local people adapted to the conditions of their environment.

Criterion (v): Djerba: Testimony to a settlement pattern in an island territory is an eminent example of spatial organization based on a dispersed settlement pattern that extended over the entire territory of the island of Djerba. The socio-economic system induced by this distinctive settlement pattern, featuring both urban and rural characteristics and dependant on complementary economic activities, is an exceptional testimony to human interaction with the water-scarce environment, and to the way the local population adapted to the challenges of insular life. It has become vulnerable to the socio-cultural and economic changes resulting from contemporary development, making its safeguarding extremely important.

Integrity

Despite the social, cultural and economic upheavals that the island has undergone in recent decades due to, among other things, the growth of the tourist industry, changing modes of transport and housing, and the partial abandonment of agriculture, Djerba has generally retained its integrity, although that of certain individual elements has been compromised. The integrity of the property could be enhanced by including uninhabited coastal areas and olive groves within its boundaries, thus reinforcing the justification for Djerba's Outstanding Universal Value. The components of the menzel-houma system, as well as fragments of the road network connecting the houma, can still be understood through the property's component parts to illustrate the dispersed nature of the rural-type settlements. The denser, urban-type clusters whose urban fabric has evolved have also retained enough structural and architectural elements to express their main characteristics. The state of conservation of most of the mosques, which have been regularly restored, is satisfactory or acceptable, as is that of the other major architectural elements of the property, such as the fondouks (caravanserai-type inns) and other religious buildings (the La Ghriba synagogue and the Catholic and Orthodox churches).  The overall integrity of the property remains fragile, requiring heightened vigilance and the mobilization of all those involved in safeguarding it.

Authenticity

Despite major changes, Djerba: Testimony to a settlement pattern in an island territory has preserved its authenticity. The original settlement pattern can still be confirmed in the component parts, although the authenticity of the houma was compromised by plot subdivisions. Most of the property's architectural components have retained their original forms and materials, but several have had their original functions altered. Some menzel continue to serve their original purpose, while many are used as second homes. Many mosques continue to be used as places of worship, but have lost their function as community centres, educational institutions or surveillance and defence structures. In urban-type clusters, gentrification can be observed, where residential spaces are transformed for tourism purposes. The natural landscape that forms part of the property has been negatively impacted.

Protection and management requirements

Djerba: Testimony to a settlement pattern in an island territory is a complex series of public and private spaces of different typologies, as well as numerous buildings serving different functions. It is legally protected by a combination of regulatory instruments covering not just the urban fabric and buildings, but also coastal zones, agricultural land, environmental policies and tourism development.

The Code du Patrimoine Archéologique, Historique et des Arts Traditionnels [Code of Archaeological, Historical, and Traditional Arts Heritage] adopted on February 24, 1994, protects the historical and traditional clusters and historic monuments. Of the twenty-four monuments included within the property's boundaries, eight are legally protected as national historic monuments. A legal process is under way to protect the remaining monuments. Their files are currently being prepared and will be submitted to the National Heritage Commission (decree no. 1475 of July 24, 1994). The seven sites of the property (five representing portions of dispersed, low-density rural-type settlements, and two incorporating parts of urban-type centres, including parts of the historic centre of Houmt-Souk and the remains of a residential neighbourhood in Hara Sghira) will benefit from a decree creating protected areas in accordance with the Heritage Code (art. 6) and the Land Use and Urban Planning Code (CATU).

The Urban Planning Code (adopted on November 28, 1994) grants high-level protection to the island of Djerba in its entirety, based on the production of relevant legal planning documents and specific zoning restrictions. A Master Plan for the Sensitive Area (SDAZS) of Djerba Island is currently being developed and is the main framework for integrated protection and sustainable development of the island, while ensuring the safeguarding of the property.

The Agricultural Land Act (decree of 1983) is an essential tool for protecting and managing the dispersed and low-density settlements, as well as the agricultural land included in the property. This protection measure was reinforced by the establishment of the Agricultural Map in 1985. The protection of coastal zones is guaranteed by Law 95-73 of July 24, 1995, on the Public Maritime Domain (DPM), whose easements are set by the Land Use and Urban Planning Code (CATU) and Law 75-16 of March 31, 1975, promulgating the Water Code and the Public Hydraulic Domain (DPH).

Further efforts are needed to improve the property's governance system and create adequate management structures that will take into account the various rights holders and stakeholders, as well as in the implementation of urgent conservation measures for the preservation of the property.

With regard to the property's management scheme, consultation within the government and with regional and local authorities has led to the adoption by the Ministry of Cultural Affairs of an instrument to ensure fruitful cooperation among all the public and private stakeholders involved. This instrument consists of two ministerial decrees, one establishing the Property Steering Committee involving all the ministries and regional and local bodies concerned; the other establishing the Property Management Unit, as an executive operational body, made up of a multidisciplinary team of local representatives of national and regional institutions, selected based on their expertise and experience.

Tunisia
Date of Inscription: 2023
Criteria: (v)
Property : 5,460.477 ha

Buffer zone: 21,328 ha
Dossier: 1640
N33 47 42.4 E11 0 19.5
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2025
Protections
by other conservation instruments

1 protection / 1 element

2003 Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage (1 element)

Arts, skills and practices associated with engraving on metals (gold, silver and copper)

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026