World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Le Colline del Prosecco di Conegliano e ...
Le Colline del Prosecco di Conegliano e Valdobbiadene
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Le Colline del Prosecco di Conegliano e Valdobbiadene
Located in north-eastern Italy, the property includes part of the winegrowing landscape of the Prosecco wine production area. The landscape is characterized by ‘hogback’ hills, ciglioni – small plots of vines on narrow grassy terraces – forests, small villages and farmland. For centuries, this rugged terrain has been shaped and adapted by man. Since the 17th century, the use of ciglioni has created a particular chequerboard landscape consisting of rows of vines parallel and vertical to the slopes. In the 19th century, the bellussera technique of training the vines contributed to the aesthetic characteristics of the landscape.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The Colline del Prosecco di Conegliano e Valdobbiadene in northeast Italy is an area characterised by distinctive hogback morphological system which provides a distinctive mountain character with scenic vistas, and an organically evolved and continuing landscape comprised of vineyards, forests, small villages and agriculture. For centuries, the harsh terrain has both shaped and been adapted by distinctive land use practices. They include the land and soil conservation techniques that comprise the viticultural practices using Glera grapes to produce the highest quality Prosecco wine. Since the 17th century, the use of the ciglioni – the patterned use of grassy terraces used to cultivate areas with steep slopes – has created a distinctive chequerboard pattern with rows parallel and vertical to the slopes. In the 19th century, the specific training of the vines known as bellussera, was developed by local farmers, contributing to the aesthetic characteristics of the landscape. The mosaic appearance of the landscape is a result of historical and ongoing environmental and land use practices. The plots dedicated to vineyards, established on ciglioni, coexist with forest patches, small woodlands, hedges, and rows of trees that serve as corridors connecting different habitats. In the hogbacks, small villages are scattered along the narrow valleys or perched on the crests.

Criterion (v): The Colline del Prosecco di Conegliano e Valdobbiadene is a viticulture landscape resulting from the interaction of nature and people over several centuries. The adaptation and transformation of the challenging terrain of the hogback geomorphology has required the development of specific land use practices, including: vineyard management by hand on steep slopes; the grassy terraces known as ciglioni, which follow the contours of the land, stabilising the soils and vineyards; and the bellussera training system which was developed in the area about 1880. As a result, the vineyards contribute to a distinctive ‘chequerboard’ appearance with perpendicular rows of high vines, interspersed with rural settlements, forests and small woods. Despite many changes, the history of sharecropping in this area is also reflected in the landscape patterns.

Integrity

The boundary of the property is of adequate size, and contains the attributes of Outstanding Universal Value within a topographically distinct and intact landform. Despite many changes and challenges posed by pests, wars, poverty, and the industrialisation of viticulture, many of the attributes such as the vineyards, ciglioni and architectural elements demonstrate a good state of conservation, and the patches of forest have been maintained. Ecological processes are critically important for the sustainability of the landscape and the vineyards. Threats are currently managed, although the state of conservation of some elements (particularly architectural and urban elements in the buffer zone) require improvement, and climate change has accentuated the incidence of landslides. The landscape could be vulnerable to irreversible change due to the pressures of production of Prosecco within a growing global market. Agricultural and viticultural techniques for maintaining the integrity of the landscape are continuing, including manual harvesting. 

Authenticity

The main attributes of the property relate to the distinctive landscape, where nature and human history have shaped and been shaped by an adapted and specific system for viticulture and land use. Despite many changes, the attributes demonstrate authenticity, and are documented through sources such as inventories and cadasters, historical and religious paintings, and historical documents that demonstrate the introduction of the ciglioni, and the operation of the sharecropping system from the first land registries in the 18th century.

Protection and management requirements

The property and its attributes are subject to protection measures at national and local levels; and municipalities and professional associations have introduced additional safeguards through territorial planning tools and the formation of legal and voluntary charters. The protection of the rural landscape is primarily guaranteed by the rules of the Conegliano Valdobbiadene Prosecco Superiore DOCG that favour the maintenance of the vineyards, ciglioni and other attributes that are fundamental for maintaining local traditions and to the protection of the agricultural biodiversity and associated ecosystem services.

Almost all of the property has been nominated to the National Register of Historical Rural Landscapes, a programme developed by the Ministry of Agriculture for the protection of agricultural rural landscapes. The forest vegetation is protected by the forest restrictions included in the National Code for Cultural Heritage, as well as by the management plan of the Site of Community Interest (SCI) of the EU Natura 2000 network applicable to the area. The buildings of historical and monumental value are all protected at national level by the Codice dei Beni Culturali e del Paesaggio (Cultural Heritage and Landscape Code) issued by Legislative Decree No. 42, 22 January 2004, along with all public buildings, state property and church-owned buildings that are more than 50 years old. The legal protection could be further strengthened through the implementation of the Detailed Landscape Plan (Piano Paesaggistico di Dettaglio) (PPD) at the regional level; the implementation of Intermunicipal regulation of rural police (Regolamento intercomunale di polizia rural); and the full implementation of the ‘Technical rule - Articolo unico’ in all relevant municipalities.

The management of the site is primarily linked to the plans and planning processes developed by the local authorities – the Veneto Region and the Treviso Province – which support and guarantee the participation of all stakeholders through a specific Regional Law (No. 45/2017). Construction of new production areas and buildings in the agricultural zone that are not strictly necessary for the working of agricultural land is not permitted. The Management Plan requires further development, adoption and implementation.

Links
Instagram page

Facebook page

The Prosecco Hills of Conegliano and Valdobbiadene

Activities 1
Cultural Landscapes
News  1
Two cultural sites added to UNESCO’s World Heritage List
7 July 2019
Italy
Date of Inscription: 2019
Criteria: (v)
Property : 20,334.2 ha

Buffer zone: 43,988.2 ha
Dossier: 1571rev
N45 57 10.9 E12 13 34
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

Protections
by other conservation instruments

1 protection / 1 element

2003 Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage (1 element)

Mediterranean diet

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026