World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Phong Nha-Ke Bang National Park and Hin Nam ...
Phong Nha-Ke Bang National Park and Hin Nam No National Park
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Assistance
Phong Nha-Ke Bang National Park and Hin Nam No National Park

This transboundary property, located along the border between Viet Nam and the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, forms one of the most exceptional and well-preserved limestone karst landscapes in the world. The karst formations in this area began developing around 400 million years ago during the Palaeozoic era, making it the oldest large-scale karst system in Asia. It features dramatic cliffs, deep sinkholes, and a vast network of underground rivers. Over 220 kilometres of caves and subterranean waterways have been documented, many of which are globally significant for their size, beauty, and scientific value. This ancient terrain supports a remarkable diversity of ecosystems, ranging from high-altitude dry karst forests to dense, moist lowland forests, which are home to many rare and unique plant and animal species, including many that are rare, endangered, or endemic to the region. The biodiversity in this region is not only remarkable but also plays a crucial role in global conservation efforts.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Russian
Spanish
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The Phong Nha-Ke Bang National Park and Hin Nam No National Park property is one of the most outstanding and intact limestone karst landscapes and ecosystems in the world. Located at the confluence of the Annamite Mountain Range and Central Indochina Limestone Belt, and straddling the border of Viet Nam and Lao People’s Democratic Republic, the property comprises a combined area of 217,447 hectares. The karst formation has evolved since the Palaeozoic period approximately 400 million years ago and can be considered the oldest large-scale karst area in Asia. The diversity of ecosystems found within this complex landscape of interbedded rock types and depressions, include high-altitude, dry karst forest, moist and dense low-elevation forests and extensive subterranean cave environments. Among these underground formations are over 220 km of documented caves and underground river systems, many of which are spectacular and globally significant. The unique and globally significant biodiversity (including several endemic species) that inhabits these ecosystems is no less impressive.

Criterion (viii): The transboundary property is among the largest intact humid tropical karst systems globally. The distinctive topography and diversity of the karst landscape is formed from the complex interbedding of limestone karst with shales, sandstone and granite. On the surface, a diversity of polygonal karst features has been recorded nowhere else, at the time of extension. Underground, an extraordinary diversity of caves (including dry, terraced, dendritic and intersecting caves) provide evidence of past geological processes, from ancient, abandoned river passages or changes in river routes, to the deposition and later re-solution of giant speleothems. Of particular significance, are the Son Doong and Xe Bang Fai caves which contain the world’s largest documented cave passage in terms of diameter and continuity and, largest active river cave passage and single cave gour pool (water formed by calcite deposits) respectively.

Criterion (ix): The property protects globally significant ecosystems within the Northern Annamites Rainforests terrestrial ecoregion, Northern Annam and Southern Annam freshwater ecoregions and Annamite Range Moist Forests priority ecoregions. The complexity and relative intactness of the limestone landscape has led to the creation of multiple ecological niches and provided the opportunity for eco-evolutionary and speciation processes to occur at the landscape level. As a result, the Phong Nha-Ke Bang National Park and Hin Nam No National Park property is home to various highly-specialised and endemic species of flora and fauna both aboveground (such as a number of orchid and begonia species) and below-ground (with some invertebrate and fish species restricted to single cave systems).

Criterion (x): A rich terrestrial, freshwater and subterranean biodiversity can be found within the transboundary property, and reported species numbers, at the time of inscription and of the extension, are likely to be a significant under-representation of the actual species diversity. The over 2,700 species of vascular plants and 800 vertebrate species recorded in Phong Nha-Ke Bang National Park include 237 globally threatened species at the time of inscription and 400 species endemic to the central Lao People’s Democratic Republic and/or Viet Nam. Over 1,500 species of vascular plants (from 755 different genera) and 536 vertebrate species have been recorded in Hin Nam No National Park, including many globally threatened and endemic species, including the Giant Huntsman Spider, the largest spider by leg span globally and endemic to the Lao Khammouane Province. The species richness of the property is likely to exceed the individual richness of the two national parks respectively due to topographical and niche differences. Importantly, the property hosts 10-11 species of primates, four of which are endemic to the Annamite Mountain range. These include the largest remaining population of Southern White-cheeked Gibbon and the endemic Black Langur.

Integrity

The transboundary property completes representation of the large, dissected karst plateau and represents a block of intact forest ecosystems within the Annamite mountains and therefore retains all key attributes to manifest the outstanding geological, ecological and biodiversity-related values present within. The property follows the respective national protected area boundaries and zonation is split into three management zones – strictly protected, ecological restoration and administrative/service zone – for Phong Nha-Ke Bang National Park, and into two zones – controlled use and totally protected zone – for Hin Nam No National Park. A buffer zone surrounds the entire property and covers 295,889 hectares and encompasses the respective watersheds of the karst.

The state of conservation varies across the property’s area at the time of the transboundary extension in 2025 and is most secure in the Hin Nam No National Park although a number of issues persist and threaten future integrity. The geodiversity, ecosystems and biodiversity are particularly prone to impacts from illegal hunting and unsustainable exploitation of natural resources and forest products, invasive alien species particularly in the eastern part of the property, infrastructure development, land-use change and sustainable tourism. These impacts should be closely monitored and controlled and mitigated, ensuring they occur within the ecological carrying capacity of the property to maintain the long-term integrity of the property and minimise threats.

Protection and management requirements

The property is owned by the respective States Parties and protected under the highest legal designation in Viet Nam and in the Lao People’s Democratic Republic. Phong Nha-Ke Bang is a nationally designated national park, first established in 1986 and then enhanced in 2001. Management responsibility falls under the Management Board at the site level with input from various ministries and levels of government. Hin Nam No is also a nationally designated national park, first established in 1993 and enhanced in 2020. It is managed by a complex and collaborative governance structure including representatives at the national, provincial, district and village level, including strong community involvement, and a management office at the site level. The management of the property is guided by two separate comprehensive management plans – the Hin Nam No National Park Collaborative Management Plan and the Strategic Management Plan Phong Nha-Ke Bang National Park World Heritage Site.

The transboundary management of the property benefits from several signed memoranda of understanding for joint activities such as law enforcement operations and the development of a joint transboundary action plan, which is essential for the integrated management of the property.

The Phong Nha Ke-Bang National Park and Hin Nam No National Park property is impacted by a number of threats that will require sustained management efforts and engagement with local communities, including unsustainable exploitation of natural resources, forest products and biodiversity, land conversion for agriculture and increased development and tourism pressures particularly in the eastern part of the property. It is essential to ensure that any development and tourism-related projects within and beyond the boundary of the property are carefully assessed, limited and regulated to ensure compatibility with the protection of the property’s Outstanding Universal Value in the long-term.

Links
Hin Nam No National Park

Phong Nha-Ke Bang National Park

 View photos from OUR PLACE the World Heritage collection

Protectedplanet.net

Activities 2
Rapid Response Facility (RRF)
Business Skills for Natural World Heritage Site Managers programme
News  3
UNESCO World Heritage: 26 new sites inscribed
17 July 2025
World Heritage Committee announces 2016 meeting in Istanbul, 24 new sites inscribed in Bonn
8 July 2015
World Heritage Committee approves extensions to two natural sites in South Africa and Viet Nam and inscribes Jamaica’s first site on UNESCO’s World Heritage List
3 July 2015
Events  2
Conservation Workshop for Phong Nha Ke Bang National Park (Vietnam) and Hin Namon National Conservation Area (Lao PDR)
7 Dec 2006 - 11 Dec 2006
Training Workshop for Strengthening the Protection and Management of Phong Nha-Ke Bang National Park
5 Dec 2005 - 8 Dec 2005
Media
play_arrow Phong Nha-Ke Bang National Park (UNESCO/NHK)
play_arrow Phong Nha-Ke Bang National Park (UNESCO/NHK)
Lao People's Democratic Republic
Viet Nam
Date of Inscription: 2003
Significant modifications to the boundaries : 2015,2025
Criteria: (viii)(ix)(x)
Property : 217,447 ha

Buffer zone: 295,889 ha
Dossier: 951ter
N17 32 14 E106 9 4.5
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2025 2023 2021 2019 2017 2016 2005 2004
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026