World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Volcanoes and Forests of Mount Pelée and the ...
Volcanoes and Forests of Mount Pelée and the Pitons of Northern Martinique
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Volcanoes and Forests of Mount Pelée and the Pitons of Northern Martinique

The global significance of Mount Pelée and Pitons du Carbet is based on its representation of volcanic processes and forest types. The 1902 eruption is considered the deadliest volcanic event of the 20th century, and a worldwide reference for the history of volcanology. All the forest types and the diversity of endemic plants of the Lesser Antilles are represented in the serial property, within forest continuums ranging from the seashore to the volcanic summits. The property is home to globally threatened species such as the Martinique Volcano Frog (Allobates chalcopis) and the Martinique Oriole (Icterus bonana), two strict endemics.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Located in the north of Martinique, at the centre of the Lesser Antilles island arc, the Volcanoes and Forests of Mount Pelée and the Pitons of Northern Martinique form a mountainous forest property of volcanic origin. The site consists of two distinct areas covering 13,980 hectares: the older Pitons du Carbet and Morne Jacob massifs in the south, and the younger Montagne Pelée and Piton Mont Conil massifs in the north. The property features all the forest types of the Lesser Antilles, from the coastline to the summits, including both climax forests and ancient secondary forests. It bears witness to a geological history that is the foundation of exceptional geodiversity and biodiversity, remarkably well-preserved.

In the north of the island, Mount Pelée majestically rises, reaching an altitude of 1,396 metres. It is inseparably linked to a major event in the history of modern volcanology, which gave its name to the Pelean eruptive type: the 1902 eruption, which resulted in the death of nearly 30,000 people and the destruction of the city of Saint-Pierre on 8 May. As for the Pitons du Carbet, they form lava domes with extremely elevated shapes, with the highest point, the Piton Lacroix, rising to 1,197 metres. Due to their number and height, they represent a remarkable example of a very rare geological phenomenon.

On each of these two entities, the property features core areas of climax forests and an unbroken continuity of plant ecosystems extending from the coastline to the summits of Mount Pelée and of the Pitons du Carbet. These volcanic areas are home to excellent examples of very ancient humid forests. The lower-altitude, drier forests are also exceptionally well-preserved for tropical volcanic islands. The flora and fauna, particularly the endemic species, are remarkable. The property is located within an area recognised by the international scientific community as one of the most irreplaceable in the world.

Criterion (viii): The Pitons du Carbet and Mount Pelée are remarkable illustrations of the volcanic morphologies and mechanisms characteristic of the Lesser Antilles island arc. The Pitons du Carbet, in particular, consist of highly elevated lava domes, a result of the great viscosity of the magmas from which they were formed. The scar from the flank destabilisation that enabled their development is the largest in the Lesser Antilles archipelago. There are twelve of these formations, five of which exceed 1,000 metres in altitude, making them the most representative examples of this geological phenomenon, which is otherwise only observed in Saint Lucia. The highest, the Piton Lacroix, reaches 1,197 metres, making it the highest in the world for the geological process from which it originated.

An iconic volcano, Mount Pelée features a unique eruptive type: the lava dome with laterally directed explosions, notable for the frequency of its past eruptions.

The eruption episode of Mount Pelée from 1902 to 1905 was particularly significant. In fact, the pyroclastic flow on May 8, 1902, led to the death of 28,000 people in the minutes following the explosion. In an extremely rare occurrence, during the 1902 eruption, 7 successive explosions took place, resulting in the formation of a 350-metre-high needle, the tallest known to have formed during any dome eruption. This eruption is a global reference in the history of volcanology, as it helped describe one of the major types of volcanic eruptions: the Pelean type. The site remains, to this day, a key location for the study of Earth sciences.

Criterion (x): The property is located within a globally recognised priority biodiversity conservation area: the “Caribbean Islands” biodiversity hotspot. It hosts the most diverse and well-preserved forest continuum in the Lesser Antilles. This vegetation cover is characterised by the quality and completeness of the forest successions, which encompass all the forest types native to Martinique and the Lesser Antilles. In the heart of the north-western slopes of the Piton Mount Conil massif, on the lower slopes of Pain de Sucre, and on the reliefs of Morne Jacob, undisturbed climax vegetation formations are preserved, particularly mesophilic and hygrophilic forest types.

The property is home to an exceptional flora comprising 1,058 species of native vascular plants, including 816 spermatophytes and 242 pteridophytes. Among these, 51 species are threatened, such as the Calumet Montagne, the Fleur-Boule-Montagne, and the Aralie. The property provides a critical habitat to ensure their long-term conservation.

The flora of the property is representative of the rich plant diversity of the Lesser Antilles and exhibits a high rate of regional endemism. There are 263 species of regionally endemic spermatophytes (Lesser Antilles), of which Martinique alone is home to 186 species, representing 71%. The island also features the most significant and representative strict endemism in spermatophytes within the Lesser Antilles, with 37 of the 104 species found along the arc. The property is home to 33 of these endemic species, accounting for one-third of the strictly endemic species of an island within the Lesser Antilles. These include: the wild pineapple, the bwa débas blan and krékré wouj. Their presence is sometimes limited to a few locations within a single entity of the property. The tree flora is also particularly rich, representing 87% of the tree flora of the Lesser Antilles (i.e., 401 species).

The animal biodiversity further enriches the property, as it is home to numerous remarkable and endemic species, such as the Martinique volcano frog, the Martinique bat, the Martinique lancehead, and the Martinique oriole.

Integrity

The property includes two of the most remarkable examples of volcanism in the Lesser Antilles arc. Mount Pelée is the best-preserved stratovolcano in the Caribbean and the last active volcano in Martinique. The current summit consists of the nested domes formed by the eruptions of 1902 and 1929, with the extrusion known as “le Chinois” being the highest point at 1,397 metres. The extremely elevated and rugged morphology of the Pitons du Carbet gives them a remarkable resistance to various pressures. A number of geosites considered important are located in the buffer zone and deserve protection through the implementation of prefectural decrees for the protection of geotopes.

The massifs are naturally protected by strong accessibility constraints. Most of the areas consist of very ancient humid forests that remain distant from inhabited zones and are served by rare trails, now barely used, most of which have been erased by the regrowth of vegetation.

In the drier forests (mesophilic and xeromesophilic), the majority of the natural spaces within the continuum are in advanced evolutionary stages, over a hundred years old. Like other Caribbean islands, various types of human activities, from the pre-Columbian period to the colonial era, have caused localised changes to the environment (such as Creole gardens or cash crops) in the lower parts of the massifs. Some remnants and traces of these former occupations still exist today, where the forest has gradually reclaimed the land. This slow and gradual process of recovery over such a vast area is unique to Martinique and unparalleled in the Antillean arc.

Protection and management requirements

The property is located within the Parc Naturel Régional de la Martinique (PNRM). The majority of the property benefits from strong national protection measures. Three integral biological reserves (RBI), established by ministerial decrees in 2007 (RBI Mount Pelée) and 2014 (RBI Pitons du Carbet and RBI Prêcheur/Grand’Rivière), ensure the protection of the massifs and the natural evolution of forest ecosystems. The Piton Mount Conil area has been protected by decree since 1996, as a classified site under the Environmental Code (1930 law). Furthermore, since 2010, two prefectural decrees for the protection of biotopes have ensured the preservation of natural habitats for two threatened species. The property is primarily under public ownership: state-owned forest and land owned by the Conservatoire du littoral. Since 2019, these public forests in northern Martinique have been nationally recognised with the “Forêt d’exception” label.

As part of these various protections, specific management plans have been developed. These management and enhancement documents are aligned with the property’s management plan. The plan also includes cooperative actions with other properties in the Caribbean, particularly in terms of management and the improvement of scientific knowledge.

The management structure of the property is led by the Parc Naturel Régional de la Martinique, under the delegation of the Collectivité territoriale de la Martinique. It relies on a management team composed of the Office national des forêts (ONF), the Collectivité territoriale de la Martinique (CTM), and the State. The ONF manages 80% of the property’s forests. The property benefits from a sustainable financing strategy to ensure its long-term management. The management committee will focus on strengthening management capacities, particularly regarding the protection and conservation of geological values.

The threats to the property are properly identified and managed, and the involvement of all relevant structures is necessary to regulate activities in the buffer zone and prevent any impacts within this area. The PNRM Charter for 2012-2027 includes a zoning system for the buffer zone, which will need to be renewed after 2027. In the buffer zone, geosites are vulnerable to the impacts of urbanization, infrastructure maintenance or creation, and the exploitation or expansion of quarries. Some of these geosites are located in the buffer zone in areas of high-activity and require enhanced protection and monitoring.

Regarding biodiversity values, certain threats identified in the buffer zone are receiving particular attention: deforestation and forestry activities, hunting, wind farms, invasive exotic species, and tourism. Deforestation and habitat degradation are potential threats to approximately 20% of the property owned by private landowners. However, these threats appear to be under control due to natural hazard prevention measures and the challenging accessibility of these areas. Hunting is not practiced within the property itself but occurs in some parts of the buffer zone. Precise monitoring is necessary to avoid any indirect negative impact on bird populations when their distribution extends beyond the property and into the buffer zone.

Scientific knowledge about the threats posed by invasive exotic species is extensive, and all organisations involved in managing the property have the necessary human resources to address this challenge (control, detection, and eradication measures). Tourism and outdoor recreational activities are strictly regulated within the property, particularly activities such as hiking, running, and canyoning in the ravines. A significant increase in tourism activities within the property could pose a threat through trail erosion and waste production.

Links
Volcans et forêts de la Montagne Pelée et des pitons du nord de la Martinique

France
Date of Inscription: 2023
Criteria: (viii)(x)
Property : 13,980 ha

Buffer zone: 28,826 ha
Dossier: 1657
Serial: yes

Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

Protections
by other conservation instruments

1 protection / 1 element

Biosphere Reserves (1 element)

Martinique

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026