World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Urban Historic Centre of Cienfuegos
Urban Historic Centre of Cienfuegos
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Urban Historic Centre of Cienfuegos

The colonial town of Cienfuegos was founded in 1819 in the Spanish territory but was initially settled by immigrants of French origin. It became a trading place for sugar cane, tobacco and coffee. Situated on the Caribbean coast of southern-central Cuba at the heart of the country’s sugar cane, mango, tobacco and coffee production area, the town first developed in the neoclassical style. It later became more eclectic but retained a harmonious overall townscape. Among buildings of particular interest are the Government Palace (City Hall), San Lorenzo School, the Bishopric, the Ferrer Palace, the former lyceum, and some residential houses. Cienfuegos is the first, and an outstanding example of an architectural ensemble representing the new ideas of modernity, hygiene and order in urban planning as developed in Latin America from the 19th century.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Cienfuegos was established in 1819 on the Caribbean coast of south central Cuba. Although located in Spanish territory, many of its first settlers were of French origin from Bordeaux and French colonies such as Louisiana. A commercial port town, located in the heart of a fertile agricultural region producing sugar, cane, mango, tobacco and coffee, its prosperity was primarily linked to the 19th-century sugar boom. By the 1860s, Cienfuegos was the third most important city in Cuba, by economical wealth. 

The city's original centre was composed of 25 blocks, laid out in a grid plan with absolute geometric regularity, inspired by the Spanish Enlightenment. As an example of modern urbanism in Spanish American, this planned town reflected new socio-economic and cultural trends related to urban order, the role of public spaces, and public hygiene requirements for natural light and ventilation. 

Public functions were focused on Parque José Martí (formerly Square of Arms) the site of the church and public and government buildings. Notable amongst the 19th-century Neoclassical buildings are the Santa Iglesia Catedral de la Purísima Concepción (Holy Church Pure Concepción Cathedral), the Tomás Terry Theater, the Spanish Casino, Palatino Tavern (or White Palace), the House Lions, "The Union" Hotel, the house-warehouse of the Spanish merchant José García of the Noceda, and the Customs Building. 

Buildings dating from the early 20th century followed a more eclectic design but maintained certain proportions, construction materials and stylistic features creating harmony. residential buildings, for example, are one or two storey’s in height with plain facades, generally without porches. Masterful metalwork of wrought and cast iron is present in elegant grills, railings and fences. 

The inscribed historic centre covers 70 hectares surrounded by a buffer zone of 105 hectares that extends south along the eastern side of the port. 

Criterion (ii): The Historic town of Cienfuegos exhibits an important interchange of influences based on the Spanish Enlightenment, and its is an outstanding early example of their implementation in urban planning in Latin America, in the 19th century. 

Criterion (iv): Cienfuegos is the first and an outstanding example of an architectural ensemble representing the new ideas of modernity, hygiene and order, in urban planning as these developed in the Latin America, from the 19th century. 

Integrity

The historic centre of Cienfuegos has retained its early 19th century urban fabric to a high degree. The grid plan defined the city's formal composition and spatial structure of plazas, square and wide avenues and has been respected and extended as the city grew beyond its original 25 block design. Integrity is also evident in the retention of many 19th century buildings along with the minimal alterations to the original building stock. Moreover, later buildings have largely respected the established height and general design proportions creating an overall harmony. 

One of the greatest threats to the historic centre is the pace of urban growth. To date, the historic core has retained its form and has not undergone any drastic changes. Due to its situation as a coastal community in a tropical region, Cienfuegos is at the risk of natural disasters such as hurricanes. 

Authenticity

The historic centre of Cienfuegos continues to functions as a vital urban area, the heart of the modern city. It has retained its original grid pattern an Illustration of the philosophical ideas of the Spanish Enlightenment on which it was based. The continuity of its urban form is visible its present spatial structure with the larger piazzas, smaller squares, wide streets, and streetscapes of classically-styles residences. 

Authenticity of the building stock within the inscribed area has been maintained in part through the use of traditional building material and construction techniques in both the rehabilitation and renovation of original building and new development. Consistency of use is evident throughout the area, in particular through the retention of port facilities and warehouses that speak to its ongoing value as a commercial port. 

As the city on the island whose founders were French, Cienfuegos has preserved a cultural link to these early settlers not only with the visible urban fabric but intangibly within an ethnic mix that also includes Spanish, African and Chinese heritage. 

Protection and management requirements

Legal protection exists at both the national and municipal levels. At the national level, principal legislation includes Protection of Cultural Heritage (1977), the law for National and Local Monuments (1977), and the 1995 declaration of Urban Historic Centre of Cienfuegos as a national monument. Additional protection includes Territorial Classification and Urban development (2001) and archaeological site preservation and conservation through the National Commission of Monuments of the Ministry of Culture (1979). The municipal government is also responsible for regular monitoring of the historic centre with the participation of several provincial level organizations. 

A management plan for Cienfuegos, completed in 2004, provides some policy to address areas of urban growth and tourism. The “interventions program” includes several levels of appropriate intervention including restoration of historic buildings with new compatible uses and infill construction in empty lots. The Office of Monuments and Historic Sites manages municipal legislation as well as development and management plans that focus on actions of inventory, conservation and restoration. Specifically, this body provides support at all levels of rehabilitation from research to support and training courses related to traditional building techniques and materials.

Links
Oficina del Conservador de la Ciudad de Cienfuegos's Facebook page

Fernandina Conecta's YouTube channel

Activities 2
World Heritage Programme for Small Island Developing States (SIDS)
World Heritage Cities Programme
News  1
Mostar, Macao and Biblical vestiges in Israel are among the 17 cultural sites inscribed on UNESCO’s World Heritage List
15 July 2005
Cuba
Date of Inscription: 2005
Criteria: (ii)(iv)
Property : 70 ha

Buffer zone: 105 ha
Dossier: 1202
Municipality of Cienfuegos
N22 8 45.193 W80 27 7.859
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
Protections
by other conservation instruments

1 protection / 1 element

2003 Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage (1 element)

Bolero: identity, emotion and poetry turned into song

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026