World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Risco Caido and the Sacred Mountains of Gran ...
Risco Caido and the Sacred Mountains of Gran Canaria Cultural Landscape
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Risco Caido and the Sacred Mountains of Gran Canaria Cultural Landscape

Located in a vast mountainous area in the centre of Gran Canaria, Risco Caído comprises cliffs, ravines and volcanic formations in a landscape of rich biodiversity. The landscape includes a large number of troglodyte settlements — habitats, granaries and cisterns — whose age is proof of the presence of a pre-Hispanic culture on the island, which has evolved in isolation, from the arrival of North African Berbers, around the beginning of our era, until the first Spanish settlers in the 15th century. The troglodyte complex also includes cult cavities and two sacred temples, or almogarenes — Risco Caído and Roque Bentayga — where seasonal ceremonies were held. These temples are thought to be linked to a possible cult of the stars and Mother Earth.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Risco Caido and the Sacred Mountains of Gran Canaria Cultural Landscape encompasses a huge central mountainous area on Gran Canaria island, sheltered by the Caldera de Tejeda, and formed of cliffs and ravines, in an area of exceptional biodiversity. The property contains a set of manifestations, which are primarily archaeological, of an extinct insular culture that seems to have evolved in total isolation, from the arrival of the first Berbers from North Africa, probably at the beginning of our era, until the Spanish conquest in the 15th century. The property has troglodyte sites, which contain a large number of rock art images, some of which are very probably cultural, and farming settlements, giving rise to a cultural landscape that still conserves most of its original elements, and the visual relationships between them. The vestiges of this pre-Hispanic culture have survived in time and space, shaping the landscape, and conserving traditional practices such as transhumance, terrace-farming installations, and water management installations. The Libyco-Berber inscriptions constitute unquestionable proof of the local presence of a pre-Hispanic culture, and bear testimony to the westernmost expression of Amazigh culture, which, for the first time, evolved into another unique insular culture.

Criterion (iii): All the archaeological sites and rock art manifestations of the Risco Caido and the Sacred Mountains of Gran Canaria Cultural Landscape bear unique and exceptional testimony to an extinct insular culture that seems to have evolved in isolation for more than 1500 years. The archaeological and historic testimony of the property bear out the fact that this culture stems from the original populations from the Berber Maghreb, which is in itself exceptional, as this is a unique case of an insular culture whose origins go back to the Amazigh world.

Criterion (v): The troglodyte sites of the Caldera de Tejeda are a unique example of this type of habitat in ancient insular cultures, illustrating a complex level of organisation of space and of adaptive management of resources. The spatial distribution and the sites documented enable a detailed understanding of the ways in which the ancient Canarians made use of the territory. This is an exceptional case, in which traditional land use practices that are highly adaptive and original, stemming from a culture that has disappeared, are still in use today.

Integrity

The property, whose geographical boundaries are set by the Caldera de Tejeda, has spectacular and monumental physical characteristics, sacred forests, troglodyte settlements on the cliffs and summits, agricultural installations for terrace farming and trails established by the ancient Canarians. The relationships between the different attributes are clearly visible, with numerous viewsheds for visitors. The property’s integrity makes it an exceptional cultural landscape, that is both complete and very harmonious, representing the final mountain refuge of the Imazighen on the Canary Islands. Over the last few years, there has been a positive evolution in the integrity of the main sites, mainly driven by the management of tourism impact and the dissemination of information.

 Authenticity

Part of the cultural landscape is considered one of the greatest expressions of biodiversity in the Canary Islands, and can be considered as a genuine vestige of the natural habitat of the first inhabitants of the Canary Islands. The authenticity of the attributes of the property is made manifest in particular by sites that are probably cultural, former granaries and multiple examples of troglodyte settlements which largely retain their original form and design, particularly troglodyte sites decorated with rock art images and bearing Libyco-Berber inscriptions. The situation and the setting of the main sites have remained without significant change for more than 500 years after the Spanish conquest. Even the route of the ancient trails, the underground cisterns and the location of the former refuges have been maintained in time and space. As a result, the main scenic elements of the cultural landscape and skyscape, including the night sky, have remained virtually unchanged since the Spanish conquest in the 15th century.

Management and protection requirements

A set of protection measures for the property ensures the complete protection of the landscape and of all the cultural and natural attributes of the property, in a short and medium term perspective. As for the cultural heritage, the main attributes have been inscribed on the list of Properties of Cultural Interest, which entitles them to maximum protection status both in national legislation and in Canarian regional legislation. The majority of the property and its buffer zone is also covered by some of the protection measures of the Canary Island Network of Protected Natural Areas, and of the European Natura 2000 network.

The Cabildo de Gran Canaria is responsible, and is the competent authority, for managing the property by virtue of the devolved powers it holds. It has the means and the human and financial resources to address this task. Bearing in mind the new challenges and objectives entailed by the nomination, such as enhancing grass-roots participation in the management process, a steering committee was set up in 2015 to provide permanent coordination of the management and the intervention/action strategy for the property. One of the Steering Committee’s main contributions has been to draw up the Integrated Management Plan for Risco Caido. The management and governance organisational chart of the property has been completed by the Risco Caido and the Sacred Mountains of Gran Canaria Foundation, which is currently in the process of being set up. The integrated management plan stresses the importance of considering the cultural landscape values as a whole, including addressing questions such as the protection of the landscape and skyscape, promoting local produce, sustainable mobility and the fostering of a sustainable tourism model.

Links
Twitter page (X)

Facebook page

Official website

Google Arts & Culture: Story

Portal to the Heritage of Astronomy

Risco Caido and the Sacred Mountains of Gran Canaria, UNESCO's World Heritage

Activities 1
Cultural Landscapes
News  2
International Day for Monuments and Sites 2021 - Complex Pasts: Diverse Futures
16 April 2021
Six cultural sites added to UNESCO’s World Heritage List
7 July 2019
Spain
Date of Inscription: 2019
Criteria: (iii)(v)
Property : 9,425 ha

Buffer zone: 8,557 ha
Dossier: 1578
N28 2 39.8 W15 39 40.3
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

Protections
by other conservation instruments

2 protections / 2 elements

2003 Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage (1 element)

Whistled language of the island of La Gomera (Canary Islands), the Silbo Gomero
Biosphere Reserves (1 element)

Gran Canaria

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026