World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Getbol, Korean Tidal Flats
Getbol, Korean Tidal Flats
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Getbol, Korean Tidal Flats

Situated in the eastern Yellow Sea on the southwestern and southern coast of the Republic of Korea, the site comprises four component parts: Seocheon Getbol, Gochang Getbol, Shinan Getbol and Boseong-Suncheon Getbol. The site exhibits a complex combination of geological, oceanographic and climatologic conditions that have led to the development of coastal diverse sedimentary systems. Each component represents one of four tidal flat subtypes (estuarine type, open embayed type, archipelago type and semi-enclosed type). The site hosts high levels of biodiversity, with reports of 2,150 species of flora and fauna, including 22 globally threatened or near-threatened species. It is home to 47 endemic and five endangered marine invertebrate species besides a total of 118 migratory bird species for which the site provides critical habitats. Endemic fauna includes Mud Octopuses (Octopus minor), and deposit feeders like Japanese Mud Crabs (Macrophthalmus japonica), Fiddler Crabs (Uca lactea), and Polychaetes (bristle worms), Stimpson’s Ghost Crabs (Ocypode stimpsoni), Yellow Sea Sand Snails (Umbonium thomasi), , as well as various suspension feeders like clams. The site demonstrates the link between geodiversity and biodiversity, and demonstrates the dependence of cultural diversity and human activity on the natural environment.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The Getbol, Korean Tidal Flats property comprises four component parts, Seocheon Getbol (6,809 ha), Gochang Getbol (5,531 ha), Shinan Getbol (110,086 ha), and Boseong-Suncheon Getbol (5,985 ha), all located on the eastern shoreline of the Yellow Sea on the southwestern coast of the Korean Peninsula. These components total an area of more than 128,000 ha with buffer zones totalling nearly 74,600 ha. The Yellow Sea, lying between the Korean Peninsula and China, hosts one of the world’s largest and most productive tidal flat ecosystems supporting millions of migratory waterbirds at the heart of the East Asian-Australasian Flyway (EAAF). The four component parts support globally important populations of threatened migratory waterbirds in the EAAF, and overlap with Key Biodiversity Areas (KBA), Important Bird and Biodiversity Areas (IBA), Biosphere Reserves, Ramsar Sites and East Asian Australasian Flyway Partnership Network Sites.

The livelihoods of many human communities along the southwestern coast of the Korean Peninsula depend on the harvest of marine resources, often based on traditional knowledge. Anthropogenic activity has transformed some of the coastal wetlands. However, the Tidal Flat Act adopted in 2019 halts any further reclamation of tidal flats and action plans under this legal framework have been progressively restoring affected tidal flats.

Criterion (x): The property contains crucial habitats for in-situ conservation of the biodiversity of the Yellow Sea region, including threatened and endemic species. It supports 47 species endemic to the Yellow Sea and several endangered marine invertebrate species. Reflecting its habitat diversity (including islands, rocky shores, beaches, sand flats, mud flats and salt marshes), some 2,150 plant and animal species have been recorded. The property encompasses many of the critical stopover sites for several globally threatened species of migratory birds, along the EAAF, one of the world’s most important yet jeopardized flyways. Many of the estimated 50 million waterbirds of the EAAF depend on the Yellow Sea’s coastal wetlands to stage on their annual migration between nesting areas in eastern Asia to as far north as Siberia and Alaska, and non-breeding areas to as far south as Australasia.

The remarkable concentrations of migratory waterbirds using the four component parts include important numbers of globally threatened species and species limited to the EAAF. These include the Spoon-billed Sandpiper; Far Eastern Curlew; Black-faced Spoonbill; Great Knot; Spotted Greenshank; Hooded Crane; Saunders’s Gull; and Chinese Egret.

The property also supports an exceptionally high invertebrate biodiversity with a total of 2,169 known species including 375 species of benthic diatoms, 152 species of marine algae, and 857 species of macrobenthos. As regards marine invertebrates, the property supports five threatened and 47 restricted-range species, including the tiger crab, which is reported to be a monospecific genus worldwide and endemic to the Yellow Sea.

Integrity

The property includes the least affected tidal flats and associated wetlands in the southwestern part of the Korean Peninsula, and they therefore provide critical habitats for migratory waterbirds on the East Asian-Australasian Flyway, including internationally threatened species, playing a crucial role for the conservation of biodiversity. The property encompasses muddy, sandy, mixed, and rocky habitats as well as beach, sand spit, and characteristic sediment bodies, which are widely developed around numerous islands. The stable supply of terrigenous sediments from the Geumgang River greatly contributes to maintaining these diverse habitats. Consequently, these globally important habitats support one of the highest species diversity of waterbirds including threatened species in the EAAF as well as rich biodiversity of other species living in and on the wetlands. While the boundaries of the four component parts provide protection for migratory birds by including feeding, breeding, and roosting areas, there is scope for additional component parts to be added and for boundaries of existing component parts to be improved as part of a second phase nomination to cover more fully the scope of critical areas used by waterbirds. As the component parts are situated in landscapes shaped by intensive use, potential threats from developments in the surrounding areas need to be monitored carefully and mitigated as needed. In addition, threats such as pollution from inland areas and internationally from marine sources as well as declining fishing stocks deserve close attention.

Protection and management requirements

The Republic of Korea has the full ownership of the property including the marine buffer zones. The four component parts of the serial property are protected by law in their entirety as Wetland Protected Areas (WPAs) under the Wetlands Conservation Act (WCA). Various other laws and regulations, including the Conservation and Management of Marine Ecosystems Act, apply in the property and buffer zones, effectively restricting damaging activities.

The Tidal Flat Act of 2019 (and associated 2019-2023 action plan for tidal flat ecosystem restoration) represents a progressive shift in national coastal management policy from coastal reclamation to tidal flat protection and restoration. This provides a mechanism, supervised by the Ministry of Oceans and Fisheries that further supports ecologically based coastal management within and outside the property with long-term measures to restore mudflats on the southwestern coast of the Korean Peninsula degraded by past developments. Continuous attention is needed to ensure that there is no further development that would have negative impact on the attributes of conservation significance in each component part of the property.

In light of the importance of inland wetlands and other inland habitats for many bird species, systematic coordination between tidal flat management and management of inland habitat is also required.

Traditional fishing activities are facilitated at current levels and are subject to self-governed rules by the fishing cooperatives in accordance with the Fisheries Act and Wetland Conservation Act. The inherent interests of, and traditional management by the local communities play an important role in ensuring the effective protection of the property given that healthy tidal flats underpin many local livelihoods.

Tourism is concentrated in only a few places of the property and its buffer zone (notably around Suncheon City), whereas many of the more remote areas, such as the small islands, have little or no tourism.

The property has adequate financial and technical resources, including staffing in all authorities involved, enhanced following inscription. Many activities by different levels of government, non-governmental organizations and local communities support the effective management and enforcement of the Wetland Protected Areas that underpin the property. There are also many measures in place to prevent, reduce and respond to risks (e.g. those related to natural and anthropogenic disasters).

The integrated management system and plan needs to demonstrate how it incorporates details on specific management interventions essential to coherently support and maintain the Outstanding Universal Value across the serial property as a whole, noting the State Party intends to enhance management effectiveness as part of a Phase II nomination to extend the serial property.

Links
Official website

Cultural Heritage Administration

News  2
World Wetlands Day 2022: Wetlands Action for People and Nature
1 February 2022
Four natural and three cultural sites added to UNESCO’s World Heritage List
26 July 2021
Republic of Korea
Date of Inscription: 2021
Criteria: (x)
Property : 128,411 ha

Buffer zone: 74,592 ha
Dossier: 1591
Serial: yes

Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
Protections
by other conservation instruments

3 protections / 7 elements

Biosphere Reserves (3 elements)

Gochang
Shinan Dadohae
Suncheon
Geoparks (1 element)

Jeonbuk West Coast UNESCO Global Geopark
RAMSAR (3 elements)

Dongcheon Estuary
Gochang and Buan Tidal Flats
Jeungdo Tidal Flat

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026