World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Medina of Tétouan (formerly known as Titawin)
Medina of Tétouan (formerly known as Titawin)
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Assistance
Medina of Tétouan (formerly known as Titawin)

Tétouan was of particular importance in the Islamic period, from the 8th century onwards, since it served as the main point of contact between Morocco and Andalusia. After the Reconquest, the town was rebuilt by Andalusian refugees who had been expelled by the Spanish. This is well illustrated by its art and architecture, which reveal clear Andalusian influence. Although one of the smallest of the Moroccan medinas, Tétouan is unquestionably the most complete and it has been largely untouched by subsequent outside influences.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The Medina of Tétouan developed on the steep slopes of the Jebel Dersa. In the Islamic period it had particular importance from the 8th century onwards since it served as the point of connection between Morocco and Andalusia. After the Reconquest, the town was rebuilt by refugees in this region who had been expelled by the Spanish.  This is well illustrated by its art and architecture which reveal clear Andalusian influence. It is one of the smallest of the Moroccan medinas but indisputably the most complete and the majority of its buildings have remained untouched by subsequent outside influences.

The Medina of Tétouan is surrounded by a historic wall of approximately 5 km in length and accessed by means of seven gates. The urban layout is characterised by main streets linking the gates to one another and giving access to open spaces (squares and smaller squares) and public buildings such as funduqs, mosques, zawayas and to the artisan and commercial districts, and on the other hand to smaller lanes leading to passages and semi-private residential areas. A true synthesis of Moroccan and Andalusian cultures, the historic town of Tétouan presents urban and architectural features that have influenced the architectural and artistic development during the period of the Spanish Protectorate. The town of Tétouan is famous for its school of arts and crafts (Dar Sanaa) and its National Institute of Fine Arts which testify to an ancestral tradition and an opening onto the world today.

Criterion (ii): The Medina of Tétouan bears witness to the considerable influences of Andalusian civilization towards the end of the medieval period of Muslim Occident. This influence is illustrated in developments in architecture, monumental arts and town-planning.

Criterion (iv): The Medina of Tétouan constitutes an outstanding example of a fortified Mediterranean coastal town, built against a North Moroccan mountain landscape. It testifies to the antiquity of the settlement, and during the Islamic period it gained considerable importance as the only connection between the Iberian Peninsula and the interior of Morocco. Its expansion from the beginning of the 17th century continued until the end of the 18th century and is reflected in its fortifications, architecture, synthesis of Moroccan and Andalusian cultures and its urban fabric.

Criterion (v): The strategic position of the Medina of Tétouan opposite the Straits of Gibraltar played an important role as the point of contact and of transition between two civilizations (Spanish and Arab) and two continents (Europe and North Africa).

Integrity (2009)

The boundaries of the property include all the attributes that are necessary to express its Outstanding Universal Value.  Some of the attributes require conservation measures and priority as concerns conservation work is given to the ramparts, gates and to the borjs (fortified watch towers). The municipality cooperates with the Government of Andalusia (Spain) in carrying out rehabilitation work in the centre of the Medina.

Authenticity (2009)

The authenticity of the Medina is illustrated by its original urban layout practically intact and its initial design with surrounding wall, gates, and fortified constructions. Their construction dates back to the 18th century and still conserves their configuration and original materials.  The Medina possesses an original urban fabric characterised by the hierarchy of streets and division of residential, commercial and artisan areas following a clearly defined plan. In general, the built heritage such as the zawayas,  fountains, hammams, ovens, and historic silos, have retained their authenticity, be it in their shape, their construction materials or their decoration or even for some, their function. The majority of houses have remained intact, even although some floors have been illegally added and interior separations have been installed.

Protection and management requirements (2009)

Protection measures are essentially regulated by the different laws for the listing of historic monuments and sites, in particular Law 22-80 (1981) concerning the conservation of Moroccan heritage. The services concerned and the local authorities and associations demonstrate a strong will and conviction in favour of preserving and conserving the property. The municipality, the town-planning services, local authorities and the Ministry for Culture are all responsible for the management and conservation of the property. Being legally responsible for the conservation of cultural heritage in general, the Ministry for Culture orients and assists the different services in their actions for the preservation and conservation of the Medina. The methods and priorities for this conservation are determined by the recommendations and directives taken in the framework of the study of the master plan of the town of Tétouan. The regional and local development plans concerning the Medina are summarised in the Master Plan for Tétouan, developed by the Ministry of Housing and Planning in 1982, giving high priority to the conservation and rehabilitation of the Medina. The Development Plan for the North-West Region prepared by the Regional Directorate for Town-Planning, Architecture and Planning in February 1996, has as its objectives, the obligation to conserve and rehabilitate the medinas. The creation, since the end of 2006, of Regional Directorates for Culture, reinforces the incorporation of a conservation policy into local development. The Development Plan for the Medina of Tétouan includes provisions for conservation and management and takes into account the universal value of the site.

Links
 View photos from OUR PLACE the World Heritage collection

Activities 2
World Heritage Cities Programme
Culture|2030 Indicators National Profile of Morocco
News  1
World Heritage Committee Inscribes 46 New Sites on World Heritage List
7 December 1997
Events  2
International workshop on the project of nomination of Tangier’s urban heritage for inscription on the World Heritage List
22 Nov 2016 - 24 Nov 2016
Bikeabout To Launch Circum-Mediterranean Tour Of World Heritage Sites
24 Sep 1997 - 30 Jun 1998
Media
play_arrow Medina of Tétouan (formerly known as Titawin) (UNESCO/NHK)
Morocco
Date of Inscription: 1997
Criteria: (ii)(iv)(v)
Property : 6.5 ha

Dossier: 837
Region Nord-Ouest, Wilaya de Tétouan, Province of Tétouan, Medina of Tétouan
N35 34 14.988 W5 22 0.012
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026