World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Phu Phrabat, a testimony to the Sīma stone ...
Phu Phrabat, a testimony to the Sīma stone tradition of the Dvaravati period
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Phu Phrabat, a testimony to the Sīma stone tradition of the Dvaravati period

The property illustrates the Sīma stone tradition of the Dvaravati period (7th-11th centuries CE). While sacred boundary markers for areas of Theravada Buddhist monastic practice vary in materials, extensive use of stones is found only in the Khorat Plateau region in Southeast Asia. Buddhism’s arrival in the 7th century led to an increase in the erection of Sīma stones throughout the region for over four centuries. The Phu Phrabat Mountain area preserves the largest corpus in the world of in situ Sīma stones from the Dvaravati period, testifying to the tradition that once prevailed in the region. The scale of Sīma stone erection and rock shelter modification has transformed the natural landscape into a religious centre, and rock paintings on surfaces of 47 rock shelters are the physical evidence of human occupation over two millennia.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The Phu Phrabat Historical Park is the best representative of the Sīma stone tradition of the Dvaravati period (7th-11th century CE) in the world. In the global context, while boundary markers for sacred areas of Buddhist activities vary in materials, extensive use of stones is only found on the Khorat Plateau in Southeast Asia. The megalithic rock shelters at Phu Phrabat, which were shaped by the combined forces of glacier movement and differential erosion of the rock strata, were venerated by the prehistoric populations two millennia ago, as evidenced by the rock paintings covering the surfaces of forty-seven rock shelters depicting human figures, hand palms, animals, and geometric patterns. Following the arrival of Buddhism in the region in the 7th century, numerous Sīma stones were erected in the Khorat Plateau region, transforming the landscape of Phu Phrabat into a sacred Buddhist site used as a religious centre. Whilst the Sīma stone tradition has continued to the present day, most Sīma stones have been relocated and reused. However, the property area preserves the largest corpus in the world of in situ Sīma stones from the Dvaravati period, testifying to this tradition that once prevailed in the region.

Criterion (iii): Phu Phrabat preserves the largest corpus in the world of in situ Sīma stones from the Dvaravati period, with all the types of establishment patterns as prescribed in Buddhist scripture, and exhibits the majority of forms and artistic styles of this particular type of sacred boundary marker with a very clear evolutionary path. It is an exceptional testimony to the Sīma stone tradition of the Dvaravati period in a global context.

Criterion (v): The landscape of Phu Phrabat has been purposefully and extensively transformed by the erection of the Sīma stones over more than four centuries to fulfil Buddhist ceremonial functions, possibly linked to the forest monastic tradition. It is an outstanding example of land use that is representative of the Sīma stone tradition that once prevailed in the Khorat Plateau during the Dvaravati period.

Integrity

The property testifies to the major forms of Sīma stones and all the spatial arrangement patterns, illustrating the major evolutionary path of the Sīma stone tradition of the Dvaravati period. In the global context, the property is the most complete testimony to the Sīma stone tradition during the Dvaravati period. It is of adequate size, and all the attributes necessary to express its Outstanding Universal Value are included within its boundaries. All the adverse impacts are under control.

Authenticity

The property preserves the largest corpus in the world of Sīma stones in their original locations, with their spatial arrangement patterns unchanged, and their physical forms and decorative art untouched, providing a truthful and credible source of information for understanding the Sīma stone tradition of the Dvaravati period in terms of form and design, materials, function, location, traditions, and spirit and feeling. Since it was converted into a Buddhist religious centre in the 7th century, the site has continued to be used as such.

Protection and management requirements

The property is protected by national and local legislation and governmental regulations, including the Act on Ancient Monuments, Antiques, Objects of Art and National Museums, B.E. 2504 (1961), with its Amended Act (No. 2), B.E. 2535 (1992), and the National Reserved Forest Act, B.E. 2507 (1964).

The property is managed by a collaborative mechanism, with the Fine Arts Department of the Ministry of Culture taking the lead role, joined by representatives of the Royal Forest Department, Udon Thani Province, Ban Phue District, Muang Pan Sub-district Administration Organisation, and Klang Yai Sub-district Municipality. Mechanisms for local community participation are implemented in the management system. The site management is guided by the Master Plan for Conservation and Development of the Phu Phrabat Historical Park 2022-2026, which was developed in collaboration with the local communities. A risk preparedness plan is in place and functioning. However, Heritage Impact Assessment mechanisms need to be incorporated into the management system. Tourism management is adequate, but the carrying capacity should be established to guide site management, and measures should be adopted to prevent the spirit of the site from being disturbed by tourism.

News  1
UNESCO World Heritage: 24 new sites inscribed
1 August 2024
Thailand
Date of Inscription: 2024
Criteria: (iii)(v)
Property : 585.955 ha

Buffer zone: 598.806 ha
Dossier: 1507
Serial: yes

Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026