World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Golestan Palace
Golestan Palace
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Golestan Palace

The lavish Golestan Palace is a masterpiece of the Qajar era, embodying the successful integration of earlier Persian crafts and architecture with Western influences. The walled Palace, one of the oldest groups of buildings in Teheran, became the seat of government of the Qajar family, which came into power in 1779 and made Teheran the capital of the country. Built around a garden featuring pools as well as planted areas, the Palace’s most characteristic features and rich ornaments date from the 19th century. It became a centre of Qajari arts and architecture of which it is an outstanding example and has remained a source of inspiration for Iranian artists and architects to this day. It represents a new style incorporating traditional Persian arts and crafts and elements of 18th century architecture and technology.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Golestan Palace is located in the heart and historic core of Tehran. The palace complex is one of the oldest in Tehran, originally built during the Safavid dynasty in the historic walled city. Following extensions and additions, it received its most characteristic features in the 19th century, when the palace complex was selected as the royal residence and seat of power by the Qajar ruling family. At present, Golestan Palace complex consists of eight key palace structures mostly used as museums and the eponymous gardens, a green shared centre of the complex, surrounded by an outer wall with gates.

The complex exemplifies architectural and artistic achievements of the Qajar era including the introduction of European motifs and styles into Persian arts. It was not only used as the governing base of the Qajari Kings but also functioned as a recreational and residential compound and a centre of artistic production in the 19th century. Through the latter activity, it became the source and centre of Qajari arts and architecture.

Golestan Palace represents a unique and rich testimony of the architectural language and decorative art during the Qajar era represented mostly in the legacy of Naser ed-Din Shah. It reflects artistic inspirations of European origin as the earliest representations of synthesized European and Persian style, which became so characteristic of Iranian art and architecture in the late 19th and 20th centuries. As such, parts of the palace complex can be seen as the origins of the modern Iranian artistic movement.

Criterion (ii): The complex of Golestan Palace represents an important example of the merging of Persian arts and architecture with European styles and motifs and the adaptation of European building technologies, such as the use of cast iron for load bearing, in Persia. As such Golestan Palace can be considered an exceptional example of an east-west synthesis in monumental arts, architectural layout and building technology, which has become a source of inspiration for modern Iranian artists and architects.

Criterion (iii): Golestan Palace contains the most complete representation of Qajari artistic and architectural production and bears witness to the centre of power and arts at the time. Hence, it is recognized as an exceptional testimony to the Qajari Era.

Criterion (iv): Golestan Palace is a prime example of the arts and architecture in a significant period in Persia, throughout the 19th century when the society was subject to processes of modernization. The influential role of artistic and architectural values of ancient Persia as well as the contemporary impacts of the West on the arts and architecture were integrated into a new type of arts and architecture in a significant transitional period.

Integrity

The delimitation of the palace compound includes all elements which convey the Outstanding Universal Value of the property. Although the Qajari architectural heritage of Golestan Palace has been much richer in the past and a considerable proportion of the palace complex has been demolished and replaced under successive rulers, all elements which have survived until the present time are included within the property boundaries.

At present the property is free of any acute threats, especially those which could compromise the visual perspectives into the wider landscape from within the palace compound. To ensure that this situation is retained in the future, emphasis should be given to the protection of visual perspectives from the inside of Golestan Palace and Gardens.

Authenticity

The characteristic architectural structures of the Qajari era retain authenticity in design and layout and have preserved the exceptional interior and exterior façade decorations. All conservation activities carried out have paid due respect to authenticity of material, design and workmanship. In addition, the palace complex has partly retained its use and function, in particular those galleries and wings that were created as museums during Qajari times. Many of the residential, representative and administrative rooms have changed purpose but the palace is still used as a location for contemporary state activities. It is probably the setting of the Qajari monuments that has changed most significantly during Pahlavi times and the authenticity of which is only retained in fragmented form. While this situation is acceptable in light of the demonstrated authenticity in material and design, it is essential that all remaining references to the historic Qajari setting of the property are carefully managed and preserved.

Protection and Management requirements

Golestan Palace is classified as a national monument according to the Law for Protection of National Heritage (1930). It has further been transferred into government ownership according to the Law Concerning the Acquisition of Land, Building and Premises for Protection of Historic Properties (1969) and is accordingly protected by both legislative means and property ownership. The buffer zone is protected by legal regulations, which were approved by ICHHTO. These limit construction and infrastructure developments, the cutting of trees, create a pedestrian zone and suggest a variety of measures for the improvement of facades and structures. It is important that the height restrictions in the buffer zone and wider surroundings of the historical district of Tehran are strictly observed to protect the sightlines from inside Golestan Palace complex.

The management of the property is guided by short, medium and long-term objectives which emphasize the conservation and restoration of the palace complex. Management responsibility lies with the Golestan Palace Base, a subsection of ICHHTO exclusively responsible for the property and functioning as a site management office. While management objectives have been presented, it would be desirable to develop a full management plan for the property, in which risk preparedness and risk response procedures should be given adequate attention.
Links
Instagram page

Official website page (in Persian only)

News  2
Meeting of Director-General and Iran’s Ambassador to UNESCO
6 January 2020
Sites in Ukraine, the Iran and the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea inscribed on UNESCO’s World Heritage List
23 June 2013
Iran (Islamic Republic of)
Date of Inscription: 2013
Criteria: (ii)(iii)(iv)
Property : 5.3 ha

Buffer zone: 26.2 ha
Dossier: 1422
N35 40 49.32 E51 25 13.84
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
Protections
by other conservation instruments

1 protection / 2 elements

2003 Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage (2 elements)

Sericulture and traditional production of silk for weaving
Turkmen-style needlework art

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026