World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Canadian Rocky Mountain Parks
Canadian Rocky Mountain Parks
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Canadian Rocky Mountain Parks

The contiguous national parks of Banff, Jasper, Kootenay and Yoho, as well as the Mount Robson, Mount Assiniboine and Hamber provincial parks, studded with mountain peaks, glaciers, lakes, waterfalls, canyons and limestone caves, form a striking mountain landscape. The Burgess Shale fossil site, well known for its fossil remains of soft-bodied marine animals, is also found there.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Renowned for their scenic splendor, the Canadian Rocky Mountain Parks are comprised of Banff, Jasper, Kootenay and Yoho national parks and Mount Robson, Mount Assiniboine and Hamber provincial parks. Together, they exemplify the outstanding physical features of the Rocky Mountain Biogeographical Province. Classic illustrations of glacial geological processes — including ice fields, remnant valley glaciers, canyons and exceptional examples of erosion and deposition — are found throughout the area. The Burgess Shale Cambrian fossil sites and nearby Precambrian sites contain important information about the earth’s evolution.

Criterion (vii): The seven parks of the Canadian Rockies form a striking mountain landscape. With rugged mountain peaks, ice fields, and glaciers, alpine meadows, lakes, waterfalls, extensive karst cave systems, thermal springs and deeply incised canyons, the Canadian Rocky Mountain Parks possess exceptional natural beauty, attracting millions of visitors annually.

Criterion (viii): The Burgess Shale is one of the most significant fossil areas in the world. Exquisitely preserved fossils record a diverse, abundant marine community dominated by soft-bodied organisms. Originating soon after the rapid unfolding of animal life about 540 million years ago, the Burgess Shale fossils provide key evidence of the history and early evolution of most animal groups known today, and yield a more complete view of life in the sea than any other site for that time period. The seven parks of the Canadian Rockies are a classic representation of significant and on-going glacial processes along the continental divide on highly faulted, folded and uplifted sedimentary rocks.

Integrity

The Canadian Rocky Mountain Parks protect many of the outstanding scenic natural features, landscapes and views for which they are renowned. Spectacular mountain peaks, ice fields, glaciers, canyons, alpine meadows, lakes, waterfalls, karst-cave systems and thermal springs fully represent glacial features and landforms typical of the Rocky Mountain Biogeographical Province. The site encompasses the renowned Burgess Shale fossiliferous sites.

The large size of the property (2,306,884 ha), its configuration (400 kms long and up to 100 kms wide), and the fact that over 95% of the area is legally or administratively maintained in a completely natural condition ensure that the outstanding features and views remain nested in an unaltered natural setting, buffered from development and activities on adjacent lands. Much of the property is surrounded by over one million hectares of adjacent parkland that is managed to similar standards.

Glacier recession due to climate change is evident within the property.

Protection and management requirements

Management of each of the seven parks that make up the property is governed by an approved management plan, prepared in accordance with the standards and requirements of the agency responsible for that park, either Parks Canada or British Columbia Parks. The plans acknowledge the World Heritage inscription, and also their park’s role in protecting representative Rocky Mountain ecosystems and offering high quality wilderness visitor opportunities.

Each of the management plans contains: a description of key features and values of the park; a long-term vision for the park and management objectives to be met; a set of management strategies that respond to current and predicted future stressors; and a zoning system that articulates acceptable land uses. The management plans are developed by their respective jurisdictions through planning processes that involve consultations with Indigenous groups, local governments, the public and other interested parties. They are periodically reviewed and updated.

Banff, Jasper, Yoho and Kootenay National Parks collaborate on trans-boundary issues such as species-at-risk conservation, resource protection and restoration, and the provision of visitor opportunities. Neighbouring provincial and national parks within the property work together periodically to address issues of common interest, such as park access, wildlife and wildfire management. It is a stated management objective of all the parks that comprise the property to also work with surrounding jurisdictions that have management responsibilities in order to maintain the OUV of the property and the integrity of the ecosystems encompassed by it.

Park management plans have identified a number of resource protection measures, such as environmental assessment processes, zoning, ecological integrity monitoring, as well as education programs, to address pressures on the property and raise public awareness. Developments approved for national transportation, for park administration and for visitor services are concentrated in less than 5 per cent of the property’s area, strictly regulated and limited by management plans, in order to minimize their impacts. Attention will be given over the long term to monitoring glacier melt that is evident within the property. Other effects of climate change, such as flooding and changes in wildfire frequency and patterns are addressed through management planning, monitoring and appropriate specific action as required.
Notes

The "Burgess Shale" property, which was previously inscribed on the World Heritage List, is part of the "Canadian Rocky Mountain Parks".

Property inscribed for both geological and ecological values under natural criterion N (ii) before 1994. Criterion N (i) [Operational Guidelines 2002] was added. For more details see Decision 30.COM 8D.1.
Links
Banff National Park

Mount Assiniboine Provincial Park

Mount Robson Provincial Park

Hamber Provincial Park

Kootenay National Park of Canada

Yoho National Park of Canada

Jasper National Park

Protectedplanet.net

Activities 1
Youth Component, 32nd session of the World Heritage Committee (2008)
Media
play_arrow Canadian Rocky Mountain Parks (UNESCO/NHK)
play_arrow NHK World Heritage 100 Series
Canada
Date of Inscription: 1984
Significant modifications to the boundaries : 1990
Criteria: (vii)(viii)
Property : 2,360,000 ha

Dossier: 304bis
Provinces of British Columbia and Alberta
N51 25 29 W116 28 47
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2006 2005 1999 1998 1997 1996 1995 1990
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026