World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
The Maison Carrée of Nîmes
The Maison Carrée of Nîmes
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
The Maison Carrée of Nîmes

Built in the 1st century AD in the Roman colony of Nemausus – today’s city of Nîmes in the Occitanie region– the Maison Carrée is one of the earliest examples of a Roman temple which can be connected to the imperial worship in the provinces of Rome. Dedicated to the presumptive heirs of Augustus, the princes of Youth, prematurely deceased, this building confirmed the control of Rome on the conquered territory while expressing in a symbolic way the allegiance and attachment of the people from the city of Nemausus to Augustus’ dynasty. The architecture of the Maison Carrée and its sophisticated decoration took part, symbolically, in the dissemination of Augustus ideologic program which turned the Ancient Rome from republic to empire, thus opening a new golden age bearer of promises of peace, prosperity and stability known by the name of Pax Romana.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Located in the Occitanie region, The Maison Carrée of Nîmes is a pseudoperipteral hexastyle Corinthian-style temple erected in the 1st century CE in the forum of the Roman colony of Nemausus. It was dedicated to the prematurely deceased presumptive heirs of Augustus – Gaius and Lucius Caesar – who were accorded the title Princes of Youth (principes juventutis), through which the dynastic line of Augustus was sanctified and the edifice turned into a temple of imperial cult.

The strategic and symbolic position of the Maison Carrée in the forum in conjunction with other buildings that in the past hosted key political and religious institutions testify to the significance of the monument as a representation of the imperial authority of Rome in Nemausus and the protection of domus Augusta over the city and its citizens.

Through its architectural design that recalls key edifices from the Augustan period in Rome, and its symbolic decorative programme, the temple testifies to the moment of unification of the territory of Ancient Rome and the transition from republic to empire, which carried the promise of peace, prosperity and stability brought by Pax Romana.

Criterion (iv): The Maison Carrée is an early and one of the best-preserved examples of a Roman temple dedicated to the imperial cult in the Roman provinces that testifies to the period of Rome’s transition from republic to empire, reflecting the political system and the imperial ideology that underlay the process of consolidation of the territory conquered by Ancient Rome in the hands of Augustus. Through the historical circumstances of its construction in the Roman colony of Nemausus, its ideological significance as a place of imperial cult, as well as the symbolic architectural and decorative programme, the edifice manifests the values brought to the Roman Empire by Pax Romana.

Integrity

The key elements necessary to express the property’s Outstanding Universal Value are included within its boundary. The structural and decorative elements of the temple have survived in their original form or have been restored with great attention to detail. The cella of the temple has no original elements preserved. The historic setting of the property within the ensemble of the forum has changed due to the evolution of the urban fabric of Nîmes over the years.

Authenticity

Restorations that the temple has undergone since the 17th century helped the Maison Carrée to recover its original form without major structural changes and to preserve its decorative elements. All structural elements of the edifice are original, with the exception of the roofing, the ceiling of the pronaos, and the cella. The materials are still largely original or closely resemble the original local ones. The authenticity of the strategic setting of the Maison Carrée within the space of the ancient forum has been lost. It can be partly appreciated through the form and design of the place de la Maison Carrée, which was created with a view of imitating the historical context.

Protection and management requirements

The property is legally protected as a national historic monument through the Code du Patrimoine (art. L.621-1 to 33). Regulatory protective measures apply to the buffer zone through Site Patrimonial Remarquable mechanism under the Code du Patrimoine, and the relevant planning documents and special zoning restrictions developed under Code de l’Urbanisme and the Code de l’Environnement.

The management structure is based on a cooperation of city services and local and regional partners. Management of the property remains at the local level, in the hands of the municipality of Nîmes, and is executed in collaboration with the Direction Régionale des Affaires Culturelles; Direction Régionale de l’Environnement, de l’Aménagement et du Logement; and the Direction Départementale des Territoires. The Comité de Bien Maison Carrée Patrimoine Mondial de l’Unesco has been established as a decision-making organ, and a Technical Committee that relies on the competences of municipal divisions acts as its operational body.

Links
La Maison Carrée de Nîmes

France
Date of Inscription: 2023
Criteria: (iv)
Property : 0.0474 ha

Buffer zone: 72.746 ha
Dossier: 1569rev
N43 50 17.6 E4 21 22.3
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
Protections
by other conservation instruments

1 protection / 1 element

Biosphere Reserves (1 element)

Gorges du Gardon

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026