World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
The Archaeological Ensemble of 17th Century ...
The Archaeological Ensemble of 17th Century Port Royal
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
The Archaeological Ensemble of 17th Century Port Royal

The town of Port Royal is located at the mouth of Kingston Harbour in southeastern Jamaica. It was a major 17th-century English port city. A devastating earthquake in 1692 submerged much of the town under water and sand. Today, its terrestrial and underwater remains offer rare insights into urban colonial life. Once a key hub for transatlantic trade—including the trade of enslaved Africans—Port Royal featured a deep-water port and six defensive forts, some now submerged. Archaeological evidence reveals a well-preserved layout of residential, religious, and administrative buildings, serving as a distinctive marker of British colonial presence in the Caribbean.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The town of Port Royal is situated on a spit of land (Palisadoes) at the mouth of Kingston Harbour in south-eastern Jamaica. In 1692, a severe earthquake devastated the town and submerged a large portion of it under water and sand. Today, the vestiges of the terrestrial and underwater elements of Port Royal are exceptional illustrations of an English urban settlement of the 17th century.

Its well-protected deep-water port allowed the town to quickly become one of the wealthiest and most significant port cities of the British Empire, and its most important regional and transatlantic trade hub in the Americas for goods – and for enslaved Africans. Surviving vestiges include the remains of six forts that guarded the town, some of which are now underwater, and the archaeological evidence of the ensemble of residential, religious, and administrative buildings of the 17th-century town.

Criterion (iv): The Archaeological Ensemble of 17th Century Port Royal is an exceptional illustration of an early English colonial settlement during the period of European expansion and rivalry, which is a significant stage in the history of the Americas. With its deep natural harbour and strategic location in the centre of the Spanish Main, Port Royal developed in just thirty-seven years from a colonial frontier settlement to a pivotal 17th-century port town, documented as the most important English settlement in the Western Hemisphere. The global network of trade that converged here is reflected in the rich volume of recovered artefacts from as far away as Asia and Europe.

Criterion (vi): The Archaeological Ensemble of 17th Century Port Royal exemplifies England’s decisive role in the trafficking of enslaved Africans to the Americas. The fortifications and infrastructure are tangible evidence of the contribution of enslaved Africans to the rise, growth, and sustainability of Port Royal, as well as to the transfer of knowledge and skills. The 1692 earthquake caused the deaths of many people, making the property a grave site not only for the merchants and the wealthy, but also for the poor and enslaved.

Integrity

The integrity of the property is based on the terrestrial and underwater evidence of the 17th-century town of Port Royal. The archaeological ensemble contains all the attributes necessary to convey the Outstanding Universal Value, including the entire town encircled by the six fortifications present at the time of the devastating earthquake in 1692, and its 17th-century urban plan. Although there are only a few standing structures from pre-earthquake Port Royal remaining today, due to numerous natural and anthropogenic disasters, new buildings have followed the intent and alignment of the 17th-century layout of the town, preserving the foundations of pre-1692 Port Royal. The underwater sections of the town are exceptionally well preserved under layers of sediments.

Authenticity

The property is in its original maritime location, and though its setting has evolved, it remains evocative of its past vocations. The forms, designs, materials, and substances of its urban plan, as well as the terrestrial and underwater archaeological evidence of its 17th-century past remain largely intact and legible. Fort Charles, for example, has undergone several restorations over time, but its materials and design can be considered largely intact. Underwater features are completely unchanged and have been preserved in situ; their authenticity is unquestionable. In terms of uses and functions, the property continues to play an important role in the maritime activities of the Kingston and Port Royal harbours.

Protection and management requirements

The property is protected under two national legislations: the Jamaica National Heritage Trust (JNHT) Act of 1985, and the Natural Resources Conservation Authority (NRCA) Act of 1991. Under the 1985 JNHT Act, the area was designated as Protected National Heritage in 1999, while Palisadoes and Port Royal were designated as Protected Area in 1998, under the 1991 NRCA Act. The latter is enforced through the National Environment and Planning Agency (NEPA). The property and its buffer zone are also protected under the Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage (UNESCO, 2001) since 9 August 2011. 

With these national and international legislations, a collaborative approach is employed by the government agencies with legal jurisdictions in the protected area, the Jamaica National Heritage Trust (JNHT) and the National Environment and Planning Agency (NEPA). These agencies co-manage the protected area to ensure the effective management and monitoring of the property.

The Port Royal & the Palisadoes Management Plan 2022-2027 developed by the JNHT, as well as the Final Draft Palisadoes-Port Royal Protected Area Management Plan 2021-2031 prepared by the NEPA, collectively provide the necessary conservation, management and monitoring of the protected area. Local stakeholders and duty bearers are involved in the management and decision-making processes.

Activities 1
World Heritage Programme for Small Island Developing States (SIDS)
News  3
Jamaica’s 17th-Century Port Royal Gains World Heritage Status
22 July 2025
UNESCO World Heritage: 26 new sites inscribed
17 July 2025
Safeguarding the Historic Naval Hospital of Port Royal
13 February 2025
Jamaica
Date of Inscription: 2025
Criteria: (iv)(vi)
Property : 27 ha

Buffer zone: 292.27 ha
Dossier: 1595rev
N17 56 19.01 W76 50 36.16
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026