World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Ancient Jericho/Tell es-Sultan
Ancient Jericho/Tell es-Sultan
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Ancient Jericho/Tell es-Sultan

Ancient Jerico/Tell es-Sultan is located northwest of present-day Jericho in the Jordan Valley in Palestine, the property is an oval-shaped Tell, or mound, that contains the prehistorical deposits of human activity, and includes the adjacent perennial spring of ‘Ain es-Sultan. By the 9th to 8th millennium BC, Neolithic Ancient Jericho/Tell es-Sultan was already a sizeable permanent settlement, as expressed by surviving monumental architectural attributes such as a wall with a ditch and a tower. It reflects the developments of the period, which include the shifting of humanity to a sedentary communal lifestyle and the related transition to new subsistence economies, as well as changes in social organisation and the development of religious practices, testified by skulls and statues found. The Early Bronze Age archaeological material on the site provides insights into urban planning, while vestiges from the Middle Bronze Age reveal the presence of a large Canaanite city-state, equipped with an urban centre and technologically innovative rampart fortifications, occupied by a socially complex population.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Located northwest of present-day Jericho in the Jordan Valley in Palestine, Ancient Jericho/Tell es-Sultan consists of an oval-shaped tell, or mound, that contains archaeological deposits of human activity dating back to about 10,500 BC, and the adjacent perennial spring of ‘Ain es-Sultan, which for millennia has been an important source of water for the inhabitants of this area.

The stratigraphy of this archaeological site shows twenty-nine phases of occupation and testifies to two historical-cultural contexts, namely the Neolithisation of the Fertile Crescent and the phenomenon of urbanism in southern Levant during the Bronze Age.

By the 9th to 8th millennium BC, Neolithic Ancient Jericho/Tell es-Sultan was already a sizeable permanent settlement, as expressed by surviving monumental architectural features such as a wall with a ditch and a tower. It reflects the developments of the period, which include the shifting of humanity to a sedentary communal lifestyle and the related transition to new subsistence economies, as well as changes in social organisation and the development of religious practices.

The Early Bronze Age archaeological material on the site provides insights into urban planning, while vestiges from the Middle Bronze Age reveal the presence of a large Canaanite city-state, equipped with an urban centre and technologically innovative rampart fortifications, occupied by a socially complex population.

Criterion (iii): Ancient Jericho/Tell es-Sultan testifies in an exceptional way to developments that took place across the Near East in the Neolithic, characterised by the shifting of humanity to a new sedentary lifestyle and the related transition to new subsistence strategies. It demonstrates how people learned to live in larger, more permanent settlements and develop new social and ritual methods of communal living. Monumental features of the property, the presence of shared structures, and the evidence of post-mortem treatment of skulls provide important insights into changes in social organisation, and into the degree of skill, planning, and labour that this social organisation required. The deep stratigraphy preserved on the tell has the potential to answer many questions related to development and change of societies in the Neolithic period.

Criterion (iv): Ancient Jericho/Tell es-Sultan is an outstanding example of a permanent settlement with a long history that testifies to the transition of the people of the Levant from hunter-gatherers to a sedentary lifestyle in the Neolithic, and provides evidence of the rise of early Levantine urban culture in the Early Bronze Age. With its monumental architectural features and shared structures dating from the 9th to 8th millennium BC, the property exemplifies in an exceptional way the process of Neolithisation of the Fertile Crescent, a significant stage in human history. It further allows developments in building traditions to be observed in both the private and public spheres in the Neolithic and the Bronze Age, its Middle Bronze Age ramparts in particular showing evidence of innovative construction techniques.

Integrity

All the attributes necessary to convey the Outstanding Universal Value are located within the boundaries of the property. These attributes include the archaeological deposits and the above-ground archaeological vestiges of Ancient Jericho dating to the Neolithic and Bronze Age periods, as well as the adjacent spring of ‘Ain es-Sultan. The excavated artefacts have been alienated from the site. The property is of sufficient size to ensure the complete representation of the features and values that convey its significance. Its archaeological deposits and deep stratigraphy are well preserved, despite destruction of some structures as a result of past archaeological investigations. The uncovered structures are fragile in some instances. The property does not suffer from adverse effects of development and/or neglect.

Authenticity

Ancient Jericho/Tell es-Sultan is authentic in terms of its forms and designs, materials and substance, and location. The Neolithic and Bronze Age archaeological vestiges of Ancient Jericho, while in some cases damaged during early excavations, truthfully convey the Outstanding Universal Value. The designs, materials and substance of the archaeological vestiges in situ are authentically preserved and have maintained their intact forms. Conservation measures are needed in several cases, such as for the Middle Bronze Age ramparts. No reconstructions have been made at the site, which remains in its historical location. Minimal interventions that have occurred have been made distinguishable from the original fabric. The rehabilitated ‘Ain es-Sultan spring has retained its original function as a water source.

Protection and management requirements

The property is protected by the Tangible Cultural Heritage Law (No. 11, 2018) of Palestine, according to which any major intervention, including conservation activities and excavations, must first be approved by the Ministry of Tourism and Antiquities, and any new structures or major changes in the areas surrounding the property require an Environmental and Heritage Impact Assessment. The Building and Planning Law (No. 79, 1966; Jordanian Law) is in force in the buffer zone. Additional regulatory measures apply through the Jericho City Spatial Urban Plan, soon to be supplemented with regulations pertaining to the Detailed Urban Master Plan for the Tell es-Sultan Area. The Jericho City Spatial Urban Plan identifies the property and the majority of its buffer zone as a protected archaeological area (antiquities zone).

The property is owned by the State Party and managed as a National Archaeological Park by the Ministry of Tourism and Antiquities, the highest heritage authority in Palestine, which is responsible for on-site management and conservation. The ‘Ain es-Sultan spring will be managed jointly with the Ministry. A Management and Conservation Plan is intended to address the most important aspects of research, management, conservation, and interpretation of the property.

Links
Ministry of Tourism and Antiquities

State of Palestine
Date of Inscription: 2023
Criteria: (iii)(iv)
Property : 5.93 ha

Buffer zone: 22.53 ha
Dossier: 1687
N31 52 16.7 E35 26 38.6
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026