World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Kernavė Archaeological Site (Cultural Reserve ...
Kernavė Archaeological Site (Cultural Reserve of Kernavė)
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Kernavė Archaeological Site (Cultural Reserve of Kernavė)

The Kernavė Archaeological site, about 35 km north-west of Vilnius in eastern Lithuania, represents an exceptional testimony to some 10 millennia of human settlements in this region. Situated in the valley of the River Neris, the site is a complex ensemble of archaeological properties, encompassing the town of Kernavė, forts, some unfortified settlements, burial sites and other archaeological, historical and cultural monuments from the late Palaeolithic Period to the Middle Ages. The site of 194,4 ha has preserved the traces of ancient land-use, as well as remains of five impressive hill forts, part of an exceptionally large defence system. Kernavė was an important feudal town in the Middle Ages. The town was destroyed by the Teutonic Order in the late 14th century, however the site remained in use until modern times.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Kernavė Archaeological Site, situated in the valley of the River Neris in eastern Lithuania, provides evidence of human settlements spanning some 10 millennia. Covering an area of 194.4 ha, the property contains archaeological evidence of ancient land use from the late Palaeolithic Period to the Middle Ages. It comprises a complex ensemble of archaeological elements, including the town of Kernavė, a unique complex of impressive hill forts, unfortified settlements, burial sites and other archaeological, historical and cultural monuments.

The property contains an extraordinarily rich concentration of archaeological evidence, encompassing natural processes of glacial retreat within a long and continuous period of human occupation and activity. The earliest evidence of human occupation between the 9th and 8th millennia B.C., and subsequent permanent inhabitation until the Late Middle Ages, can be found in several cultural layers and burial sites. The spectacular complex of five hill forts dates back to the 13th century, when Kernavė was an important feudal town of craftsmen and merchants who required the protection of such a complex defence system. The town of Kernavė was destroyed by the Teutonic Order in the late 14th century, but the site continued to be used until modern times. 

Criterion (iii): The archaeological site of Kernavė presents an exceptional testimony to the evolution of human settlements in the Baltic region over the period of some ten millennia. The property has exceptional evidence of pantheistic and Christian funeral traditions.

Criterion (iv): The settlement patterns and the impressive hill-forts represent outstanding examples of the development of such types of structures and the history of their use in the pre-Christian era. 

Integrity

Kernavė Archaeological Site (Cultural Reserve of Kernavė) encompasses complex archaeological and historical sites and providing evidence of many settlement stages. The property incorporates all elements that demonstrate the 11,000 years of continuous human use that underpins its Outstanding Universal Value. There are 15 archaeological and 3 historical monuments in the territory of the Cultural Reserve of Kernavė, including the ancient settlements of Kernavė; Kernavė cemetery; the complex of 5 mounds and ancient settlements of the old town of Kernavė and numerous other monuments up to the 20th century. All the archaeological research material (movable cultural property) is stored and displayed in the Archaeological Site Museum of Kernavė.

The Management Plan includes a buffer zone comprising an additional 2455.2 ha, divided into two subsections which make provisions for the physical and visual protection of the property and aim to isolate the Cultural Reserve and associated elements from any negative impacts of activities outside of the Cultural Reserve. Prior to the establishment of the Cultural Reserve in 1989, the lower terrace was used for economic activities such as land cultivation, small-scale developments, pasturages for cattle and traffic). These activities are now prohibited and the remaining settlement is maintained in accordance with the restrictions of heritage protection. 

Authenticity

Kernavė Archaeological Site has a high degree of authenticity with regard to its location, its individual elements and the rich archaeological evidence found within the property. The prehistoric and medieval cultural elements of the Kernavė Archaeological Site remain intact because most of the area was abandoned at the end of the 14th century, with later settlements established to the north.

This resulted in the natural preservation of the authenticity of the cultural elements, materials and landscape of the Kernavė Archaeological Site. The systematic and extensive archaeological investigations carried out on site since 1979 have significantly added to knowledge about the property, and provide exemplary scientific evidence of its unique qualities as a site of continuous human adaptation and use since the prehistoric times. The associated excavated materials and movable cultural heritage objects are kept in the archaeological museum, further presenting the authenticity of both Kernavė’s movable and immovable heritage.

Potential impacts on the property’s authenticity may arise from the increase of cultural tourism in the region.

Archaeological research performed from 1979 examined only about 2% of the territory of the Cultural Reserve of Kernavė and had no negative impact on the authenticity of the monuments. In accordance with the methods on protection and management of immovable valuables, various preventive actions were taken since 1985 at the archaeological site. 

Protection and management requirements

Kernavė Archaeological Site (Cultural Reserve of Kernavė) – hereinafter: the Cultural Reserve – was established as a protected territory, with the highest protection status under a decree of the Seimas (Parliament) of the Republic of Lithuania. There are 15 archaeological and 3 historical monuments in the territory of the Cultural Reserve of Kernavė that are included in the Register of Cultural Property of Lithuania. The entire Cultural Reserve is in the exclusive ownership of the State, which is managed and used by the Administration of the State Cultural Reserve of Kernavė (hereinafter: – the Administration) under trust. Business activities are prohibited within the territory, except for works related to scientific research or adaptation of the site for visiting purposes. The activities within the Cultural Reserve are regulated by a range of legal acts that make provision for heritage protection. These include the Republic of Lithuania Law on Protected Territories, Law on Immovable Cultural Heritage Protection, the Laws on the Land, on Construction, on Territory Planning, and the Cultural Reserve Statute approved by the Government of the Republic of Lithuania.

The Administration is a State Cultural institution financed from the State budget, and administered by the Ministry of Culture of the Republic of Lithuania. It is responsible for the protection of the Cultural Reserve and the maintenance of the Outstanding Universal Value of the World Heritage property. The Administration organises activities and implements its goals in accordance with the Statute approved by the Minister of Culture. The Head of the Administration (Site Manager) is advised by an Advisory Council appointed by the Minister of Culture, and benefits from their input on matters including the protection and maintenance of the Cultural Reserve, scientific and archaeological research programmes, the development of visitor infrastructure and the activities within the Cultural Reserve and its buffer zone.

The Cultural Reserve buffer zone and its territory were approved by resolution of the Seimas (Parliament) of the Republic of Lithuania. The buffer zone was established in order to shield the cultural values of the Cultural Reserve from the physical, visual or social impacts and assure the general ecological balance. In 2005, the Minister of Culture approved an individual protection regulation for the Cultural Reserve buffer zone, which established the requirements for natural and legal entities engaged in business activities and construction. The regulations make provision for the Administration, in cooperation with the State and municipality institutions that administer the territories, to coordinate and control the implementation of all projects that take place in the buffer zone of the Cultural Reserve. In 2009, a Special Plan of the Cultural Reserve was approved by the Government of the Republic of Lithuania. This strategic document outlines the management and long-term maintenance measures for the Archaeological Site of Kernavė to safeguard the Outstanding Universal Value of the World Heritage property.

In 2011, the Cultural Reserve has been given "enhanced protection" status which is one of the features of the 1999 Second Protocol to the Hague Convention of 1954 for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict.

Links
Facebook page

Kernavė Archaeological Site (in English and Lithuanian only)

Activities 1
Cultural Landscapes
News  2
Videos: Site managers report on Covid-19
26 October 2020
Kernavė Archaeological site in Lithuania granted “enhanced protection” in the event of armed conflict
15 December 2011
Events  2
[in French only] Lituanie dans un colis : Exposition thématique
30 Sep 2013 - 4 Oct 2013
30th Ordinary Session of the World Heritage Committee
8 Jul 2006 - 16 Jul 2006
Media
play_arrow Kernavė Archaeological Site (Cultural Reserve of ... (UNESCO/NHK)
Lithuania
Date of Inscription: 2004
Criteria: (iii)(iv)
Property : 194.4 ha

Buffer zone: 2,455.2 ha
Dossier: 1137
Vilnius county, Širvintos district, Kernave town.
N54 52 44.4 E24 51 10.8
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

Protections
by other conservation instruments

1 protection / 1 element

Second Protocol to the 1954 Hague Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict (1 element)

Kernavé Archaeological Site

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026