World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Chitwan National Park
Chitwan National Park
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Assistance
Chitwan National Park

At the foot of the Himalayas, Chitwan is one of the few remaining undisturbed vestiges of the 'Terai' region, which formerly extended over the foothills of India and Nepal. It has a particularly rich flora and fauna. One of the last populations of single-horned Asiatic rhinoceros lives in the park, which is also one of the last refuges of the Bengal tiger.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Nestled at the foot of the Himalayas, Chitwan has a particularly rich flora and fauna and is home to one of the last populations of single-horned Asiatic rhinoceros and is also one of the last refuges of the Bengal Tiger. Chitwan National Park (CNP), established in 1973, was Nepal’s first National Park. Located in the Southern Central Terai of Nepal, it formerly extended over the foothills, the property covers an area of 93,200 hectares, extends over four districts: Chitwan, Nawalparasi, Parsa and Makwanpur. 

The park is the last surviving example of the natural ecosystems of the ‘Terai’ region and covers subtropical lowland, wedged between two east-west river valleys at the base of the Siwalik range of the outer Himalayas. The core area lies between the Narayani (Gandak) and Rapti rivers to the north and the Reu River and Nepal-India international border in the south, over the Sumeswar and Churia hills, and from the Dawney hills west of the Narayani, and borders with Parsa Wildlife Reserve to the east. In 1996, an area of 75,000 hectares consisting of forests and private lands and surrounding the park was declared as a buffer zone. In 2003, Beeshazar and associated lakes within the buffer zone were designated as a wetland of international importance under the Ramsar Convention.

Criteria (vii): The spectacular landscape, covered with lush vegetation and the Himalayas as the backdrop makes the park an area of exceptional natural beauty. The forested hills and changing river landscapes serve to make Chitwan one of the most stunning and attractive parts of Nepal’s lowlands. Situated in a river valley basin and characterized by steep cliffs on the south-facing slopes and a mosaic of riverine forest and grasslands along the river banks of the natural landscape makes the property amongst the most visited tourist destination of its kind in the region. The property includes the Narayani (Gandaki) river, the third-largest river in Nepal which originates in the high Himalayas and drains into the Bay of Bengal providing dramatic river views and scenery as well as the river terraces composed of layers of boulders and gravels.

The property includes two famous religious areas: Bikram Baba at Kasara and Balmiki Ashram in Tribeni, pilgrimage places for Hindus from nearby areas and India. This is also the land of the indigenous Tharu community who have inhabited the area for centuries and are well known for their unique cultural practices.

Criteria (ix): Constituting the largest and least disturbed example of sal forest and associated communities, Chitwan National Park is an outstanding example of biological evolution with a unique assemblage of native flora and fauna from the Siwalik and inner Terai ecosystems. The property includes the fragile Siwalik-hill ecosystem, covering some of the youngest examples of this as well as alluvial flood plains, representing examples of ongoing geological processes. The property is the last major surviving example of the natural ecosystems of the Terai and has witnessed minimal human impacts from the traditional resource dependency of people, particularly the aboriginal Tharu community living in and around the park.

Criteria (x): The combination of alluvial flood plains and riverine forest provides an excellent habitat for the Great One-horned Rhinoceros and the property is home for the second largest population of this species in the world. It is also prime habitat for the Bengal Tiger and supports a viable source population of this endangered species. Exceptionally high in species diversity, the park harbours 31% of mammals, 61% of birds, 34% of amphibians and reptiles, and 65% of fishes recorded in Nepal. Additionally, the park is famous for having one of the highest concentrations of birds in the world (over 350 species) and is recognized as one of the worlds’ biodiversity hotspots as designated by Conservation International and falls amongst WWFs’ 200 Global Eco-regions.

Integrity

The property adequately incorporates the representative biodiversity of the central Terai-Siwalik ecosystem and in conjunction with the adjacent Parsa Wildlife Reserve constitutes the largest and least disturbed example of sal forest and associated communities of the Terai. The park also protects the catchment of the river system within the park and the major ecosystems included are Siwalik, sub-tropical deciduous forest, riverine and grassland ecosystems. The Park boundary is well defined.  The ecological integrity of the park is further enhanced by the adjoining Parsa Wildlife Reserve to its eastern boundary and the designation of a buffer zone around the Park that is not part of the inscribed World Heritage Site but provides additional protection and important habitats.

The World Heritage values of the Park have been enhanced as the population of Greater One-horned Rhinoceros and Bengal Tiger have increased (Rhinoceros - around 300 in the 1980s to 503 in 2011 and Tigers 40 breeding adults in the 1980s to 125 breeding adults in 2010). While no major changes in the natural ecosystem have been observed in the recent years the grasslands and riverine habitats of the park have been encroached by invasive species such as Mikania macrantha.

Poaching of endangered one horned rhinoceros for illegal trade of its horn is one pressing threat faced by the park authority, despite the tremendous efforts towards Park Protection. Illegal trade in tiger parts and timber theft are also threats with the potential to impact on the integrity of the property. The traditional dependency of local people on forest resources is well controlled and has not been seen to impact negatively on the property. Human-wildlife conflict remains an important issue and threat that has been addressed through compensation schemes and other activities as part of the implementation of the buffer zone program.

Protection and management requirements

Chitwan National Park has a long history of protection dating back to the early 1800s. It has been designated and legally protected under the National Parks and Wildlife Conservation Act, 1973. The Nepalese Army has been deployed for park protection since 1975. In addition, Chitwan National Park Regulation, 1974 and Buffer Zone Management Regulation, 1996 adequately ensure the protection of natural resources and people’s participation in conservation as well as socio-economic benefits to people living in the buffer zone. This makes Chitwan National Park an outstanding example of Government-Community partnership in biodiversity conservation.

The management of the property is of a high standard and the Government of Nepal has demonstrated that it recognizes the value of the park by investing significant resources in its management. Management activities have been guided by the Management Plan, which should undergo regular updating and revision to ensure key management issues are being addressed sufficiently. The first five year Management Plan (1975-1979) for CNP was prepared in 1974 with an updated plan for 2001-2005 expanded to include CNP and its Buffer Zone along with the provision of three management zones. A subsequent plan covering 2006-2011 covers the Park and the Buffer Zone and streamlines the conservation and management of the property. The maintenance of the long-term integrity of the park will be ensured through continuation of the existing protection strategy with need-based enhancement as well as maintaining intact wildlife habitat through science-based management. Effective implementation of the buffer zone program will continue to address the issues regarding human-wildlife conflicts.

The aquatic ecosystem of the park has been threatened by pollution from point and non-point sources including developments in close proximity to Narayani River. This pollution needs to be controlled with the coordinated efforts of all the stakeholders. The need to maintain the delicate balance between conservation and the basic requirements of people living around the park remains a main concern of the management authority. The need to address issues related to regulation of increasing traffic volume at Kasara bridge, construction of a bridge at Reu River and the underground electricity transmission line for the people living in Madi valley are also concerns.

High visitation and the maintenance of adequate facilities remain an ongoing management issue. As one of the most popular tourist sites in Nepal, due to the ease of wildlife viewing and spectacular scenery and the economic benefit of this is significant. Facilities are a model of appropriate park accommodation with efforts continuing to ensure this is maintained. Poaching of wildlife and vegetation remains an important issue and the most significant threat too many of the species and populations harboured within the park. Ongoing efforts to tackle this problem are required despite already significant attempts to enforce regulations and prevent poaching.

Links
Official website page

Protectedplanet.net

Activities 2
Enhancing our Heritage- Monitoring and managing for success in World Natural Heritage sites
Rapid Response Facility (RRF)
News  5
Director-General Signs Condolences Book for Nepal
7 May 2015
UNESCO to assess the impact on Nepal’s cultural heritage of the devastating earthquake
27 April 2015
UNESCO Director General expresses distress after earthquake in Nepal
25 April 2015
UN On-line Volunteers and World Heritage
5 June 2013
More add
Nepal
Date of Inscription: 1984
Criteria: (vii)(ix)(x)
Property : 93,200 ha

Dossier: 284
Chitwan District of the Narayani Zone
N27 30 0 E84 19 59.988
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2025 2023 2021 2019 2017 2015 2014 2004 2003 2002 2001 1998 1997 1993 1991 1990
Protections
by other conservation instruments

1 protection / 1 element

RAMSAR (1 element)

Beeshazar and Associated Lakes

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026