World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Frontiers of the Roman Empire – Dacia
Frontiers of the Roman Empire – Dacia
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Frontiers of the Roman Empire – Dacia

From 500 BCE on, the Roman Empire extended its territory across parts of Europe and North Africa until its frontier totaled some 7,500 kilometres by the 2nd century. The Romanian segment, the Dacian Limes, was operational from 106 to 271 CE. The property comprises 277 component parts and represents the longest, most complex land border of a former Roman province in Europe. Traversing diverse landscapes, it is defined by a network of individual sites that include legionary fortresses, auxiliary forts, earthen ramparts, watch towers, temporary camps and secular buildings. Dacia was the only Roman province entirely north of the Danube River. Its frontier protected it from ‘barbarian’ populations and controlled access to valuable gold and salt resources.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Frontiers of the Roman Empire – Dacia extended for more than a thousand kilometres along the western, northern and eastern borders of the Roman province of Dacia, from the Danube River on each end, and encompassing the Transylvanian Plateau and crossing the lowlands of Muntenia along the Olt River. It was part of the Roman frontiers for nearly 170 years, protecting it from ‘barbarian’ populations, ensuring the supervision and control of their movements at the northern fringes of the empire, and securing access to valuable gold and salt resources.

Dacia was the only Roman province located entirely north of the Danube River. The diverse landscapes and topography of the Dacian province include mountains, forests, valleys, plateaus, lowlands and river courses. A complex system was established with a wide range of military installations, including temporary camps, networks of watchtowers, artificial barriers (earthworks, walls), small fortifications, auxiliary forts and legionary fortresses, with their associated civilian settlements. Based on these formal characteristics, seven sectors of the frontier are evident (both land and riverine) and were integrated into a unitary border, an unparalleled situation in other sectors of the Roman limes. An eighth sector contains a cluster of high-altitude marching camps.

Established at the beginning of the 2nd century CE, with the conquest and annexation of the Dacian kingdom, the frontier of Dacia did not survive the late 3rd century crisis of the Roman Empire. It was officially renounced c.270/275 CE, when Emperor Aurelian withdrew the Roman army and administration from Dacia. The relatively short time that the Roman frontier of Dacia functioned was nevertheless eventful. The constant pressure on the border is reflected by its characteristics and evolution. It also prominently illustrates the extraordinary capacity of the Romans to adapt to the local topography and use it to their advantage.

Criterion (ii): The extant remains of Frontiers of the Roman Empire – Dacia constitute significant elements of the Roman frontiers in Europe. The serial property exhibits an important interchange of human and cultural values at the height of the Roman Empire, through the development of Roman military architecture, extending the technical knowledge of construction and management to the very edges of the empire. It reflects the imposition of a complex frontier system on the existing societies of the northern part of the Roman Empire, introducing military installations and related civilian settlements, linked through an extensive supporting network. The frontier did not constitute an impregnable barrier, but controlled and allowed the movement of peoples. This entailed profound changes and developments in terms of settlement patterns, architecture and landscape design and spatial organisation.

Criterion (iii): As part of the Roman Empire’s general system of defence, Frontiers of the Roman Empire – Dacia bears an exceptional testimony to the maximum extension of the power of the Roman Empire through the consolidation of its northern frontiers and constitutes a physical manifestation of Roman imperial policy. The property illustrates the Roman Empire’s ambition to dominate the world in order to establish its law and way of life in a long-term perspective. It demonstrates the processes of Roman colonisation in its territories, the spread of Roman culture and its different traditions – military, engineering, architecture, religion, management and politics. The large number of human settlements associated with the defences contribute to an understanding of how soldiers and their families lived in this part of the Roman Empire.

Criterion (iv): The Frontiers of the Roman Empire – Dacia is a remarkable example of Roman military architecture and technological development. The property testifies to the versatility and sophistication of the Roman response to specific topography and climate, set against the political, military and social backdrop of the time in the northern part of the empire. Stretching for more than a thousand kilometres, it is the largest segment of the Frontiers of the Roman Empire. It comprises both land and riverine sectors, characterised by varying types, locations and densities of military installations distributed across the landscape. Fortifications of different sizes, set at irregular intervals, artificial linear barriers (stone walls, earthworks), natural barriers (mountain ranges, rivers), packed or sparse networks of watchtowers were all integrated within the same provincial border. The Dacian frontier exhibits numerous structural changes throughout its nearly 170 years of existence allowing insight into an important timeline in the history of the Roman Empire.

Integrity

The property of the Frontiers of the Roman Empire – Dacia demonstrates the complexity of the European frontiers of the Roman Empire. A well-considered rationale for the selection of the 277 component parts has been developed, enabling the property to represent the phased establishment and the workings of the Dacian Limes, including its adaptation to and use of diverse landscapes. Some of the component parts of the property have been affected by exposure to natural elements and human activities. Archaeological excavations, field surveys, aerial photography and non-invasive investigations have established the completeness of the component parts, and the intactness of most attributes is assessed as good to very good, showcasing the most important development phases. Despite processes of decay, many individual sites are very well preserved. With few exceptions, their exposure to threats is insignificant, and the boundaries are appropriately delineated.

Authenticity

The 277 component parts of the Frontiers of the Roman Empire – Dacia demonstrate a very high degree of authenticity, due in part to the relatively short lifespan of the frontier and the relatively undisturbed rural locations of many of the component parts. Most of the sites remain free of modern constructions or later modifications, and the above and below ground structures retain their original form and design. Above-ground and excavated elements are conserved and generally in a good state of conservation, and non-invasive investigations indicate a good preservation of sub-surface archaeological materials. Since most of the areas in which the frontier component parts are located are lightly populated, the authenticity of the landscape setting for most component parts is high.

Protection and management requirements

All 277 component parts of Frontiers of the Roman Empire – Dacia are legally protected. All archaeological sites within the component parts are protected through their inclusion in the National Archaeological Record (RAN), and the process of designation of all of the component parts is in progress. The component parts, their buffer zones and immediate landscapes are also protected by laws for spatial planning, including the General Urban Plans which are being revised to ensure the recognition and protection of the component parts and clusters.

The management system integrates four levels of intervention, including the Ministry of Culture, County Councils, the National Institute of Heritage and the National Limes Commission. A UNESCO Organising Committee will be established to coordinate across these responsibilities. The National Limes Commission is responsible for the coordination of research activities and the scientific components of integrated management and monitoring. On an international level, the State Party continues to cooperate with partners within the Frontiers of the Roman Empire World Heritage Cluster.

The management framework is oriented around three key management themes: research, conservation and enhancement; factors affecting the property; and tourism, visitor management and interpretation. The monitoring arrangements are outlined, and an action plan is provided. Based on this over-arching framework, the National Institute of Heritage will coordinate the development of management plans for each component part/cluster to guide local decision making. A number of important elements of the management system are under development, including the interpretation strategy and Heritage Impact Assessment.

Activities 1
Culture|2030 Indicators National Profile of Romania
News  1
UNESCO World Heritage: 24 new sites inscribed
1 August 2024
Romania
Date of Inscription: 2024
Criteria: (ii)(iii)(iv)
Property : 1,491.6 ha

Buffer zone: 14,197.61 ha
Dossier: 1718
Serial: yes

Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
Protections
by other conservation instruments

3 protections / 4 elements

1972 World Heritage Convention (1 element)

Ancient and Primeval Beech Forests of the Carpathians and Other Regions of Europe
Geoparks (2 elements)

Djerdap UNESCO Global Geopark
Haţeg Country UNESCO Global Geopark
RAMSAR (1 element)

Belene Islands Complex

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026