World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Historic Monuments Zone of Tlacotalpan
Historic Monuments Zone of Tlacotalpan
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Historic Monuments Zone of Tlacotalpan

Tlacotalpan, a Spanish colonial river port on the Gulf coast of Mexico, was founded in the mid-16th century. It has preserved its original urban fabric to a remarkable degree, with wide streets, colonnaded houses in a profusion of styles and colours, and many mature trees in the public open spaces and private gardens.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief Synthesis

Tlacotalpan, is an exceptionally well-preserved Spanish colonial river port close to the coast of the Gulf of Mexico. The original urban plan, a checkerboard or grid pattern, laid out by the Spanish in the mid 16th century, has been preserved to a remarkable degree. Its wide streets are lined with colonnaded houses that reflect a vernacular Caribbean tradition with exuberant decoration and colour. Many mature trees can be found in the public parks, open spaces and private gardens. Initially settled by the Spanish around 1550, the settlement reached its major brilliance in the 19th century.

The surviving grid pattern consists of 153 blocks covering 75 hectares and divided into two distinct sectors, the larger “Spanish” quarter in the west and smaller “native quarter in the east. The larger quarter is created by seven wide streets or calles laid out east-west parallel to the Papaloapan River and connected by narrow lanes or callejones. The “public” sector, an irregularly-shaped area found at the intersection of the two quarters, has commercial and official buildings as well as public open spaces.

Arcades of arched porticos line the streets. These arcades are supported by pillars varying in form and style from simple beams to fluted columns with elaborately ornamented bases, capitals and moulded cornices. Tlacotalpan has retained an unusual density of high-quality historic buildings that provide architectural harmony and homogeneity. While the basic vernacular style is found elsewhere on the Mexican Gulf Coast, Tlacotalpan’s single-storey houses exhibit distinctive manifestations that include a profusion of brightly-coloured exteriors and original features such as the roof coverings of curved terra cotta tiles and the layouts with interior courtyards.

Criterion (ii) the urban layout and architecture of Tlacotalpan represent a fusion of Spanish and Caribbean traditions of exceptional importance and quality.

Criterion (iv) Tlacotalpan is a Spanish colonial river port near the Gulf coast of Mexico, which has preserved its original urban fabric to an exceptional degree. Its outstanding character lies in its townscape of wide streets, modest houses in an exuberant variety of styles and colours, and many mature trees in public and private open spaces.

Integrity 

The integrity of Tlacotalpan’s historic zone is established by the retention of the original grid pattern of the and the relationship of buildings to open spaces with mature trees. A significant number of surviving historic buildings exhibit traditional elements including the exuberant colours and tile roofs.

Integrity is threatened primarily by inappropriate renovations to historic buildings along with incompatible land use, particularly along the river that threatens the integrity of the natural environment as well as the landscape. Flooding continues to be of concern although the frequency and severity of floods has been reduced through the development of an effective system of drainage and the cleaning of adjacent marshlands. Regardless, flood management needs to continue including the Malecon project and controls of hydroelectric dams.

Authenticity

Tlacotalpan’s authenticity is established by the retention of its urban fabric, dating to the 17th century. The checkerboard street pattern laid out adjacent to the river, the arched colonnades along the main facades of the traditional houses which in turn have preserved their overall form, scale, decoration and colours. Moreover, the many of the houses retain their interior layout and even traditional furnishings.

Protection and management requirements

The conservation of the historic centre of Tlacotalpan is legally protected at both the state and federal level. In 1968, the State of Veracruz declared it “Typical Conservation Town” Typical City and of natural beauty. In 1986 it was declared a Historic Monuments Zone by federal law with the responsibility for its management under of the national organizations Instituto Nacional de Antropologia e Historia (INAH) and Instituto Nacional de Bellas Artes (INBA). A “transition zone” that extends across the Papaloapan River was defined in the Urban Development Plan (established in 1985 and revised in 1997) served as a buffer zone at the time of inscription.

A current programme of Urban Classification is designed to assist with future growth and improvements to the urban infrastructure while ensuring that appropriate conservation methods are undertaken. INAH and Fondo Nacional para la Cultura y las Artes (FONCA) have assisted in the development of a management plan completed in November 2007. This document identified diverse actions for regeneration of the city in general to improve the economy through the creation of jobs and increased tourism. Other plans relate to the Integral Improvement of the Malecon (2010) and a risk preparedness project relating to flooding.

In order to implement any of the programs identified above, which guarantee the conservation, protection and improvement of the site, a coordinated approach involving the participation of both municipal and state authorities with the INAH is required.

Links
H. Ayuntamiento Tlacotalpan 2022-2025's Facebook page

H. Ayuntamiento de Tlacotalpan Ciudad Patrimonio de la Humanidad's website page (in Spanish only)

Estado de Veracruz (spanish only)

Paquimé (Instituto Nacional de Antropología e Historia - INAH)(spanish only)

Activities 3
World Heritage Cities Programme
Promoting local businesses in Mexican World Heritage Cities
Culture|2030 Indicators National Profile of the Mexico
News  2
Serious flooding at the Historic Monuments Zone of Tlacotalpan (Mexico) World Heritage property
16 September 2010
UNESCO World Heritage Committee Adds 30 Sites to World Heritage List
2 December 1998
Mexico
Date of Inscription: 1998
Criteria: (ii)(iv)
Property : 75 ha

Buffer zone: 320 ha
Dossier: 862
State of Veracruz, Tlacotalpan Municipality
N18 36 48.452 W95 39 31.234
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
Protections
by other conservation instruments

1 protection / 1 element

Biosphere Reserves (1 element)

Sistema Arrecifal Veracruzano

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026