World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Archaeological Landscape of the First Coffee ...
Archaeological Landscape of the First Coffee Plantations in the South-East of Cuba
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Archaeological Landscape of the First Coffee Plantations in the South-East of Cuba

The remains of the 19th-century coffee plantations in the foothills of the Sierra Maestra are unique evidence of a pioneer form of agriculture in a difficult terrain. They throw considerable light on the economic, social, and technological history of the Caribbean and Latin American region.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The First Coffee Plantations in the Southeast of Cuba is a cultural landscape illustrating colonial coffee production from the 19th to early 20th centuries. It includes not only the architectural and archaeological material evidence of 171 old coffee plantations or cafetales, but also the infrastructure for irrigation and water management, and the transportation network of mountain roads and bridges connecting the plantations internally and with coffee export points. The topography, dominated by the steep and rugged slopes of the Sierra Maestra foothills, speaks to the plantation owners’ (primarily of French and Haitian origin) ingenuity in their exploitation of the natural environment through the sweat and blood of their African slaves. The inscribed property occupies a total area of 81,475 hectares within the two provinces of Guantanamo and Santiago de Cuba. The Sierra Maestra Grand National Park encompasses the area of the inscribed property located in Santiago de Cuba. 

Individual plantations exist in varying states of preservation from the restored museum of La Isabelica coffee plantation farm to plantation ruins that are no more than archaeological sites. Typically, plantations include the owner’s house, terraced drying floors, production areas for milling and roasting, and workers’ quarters. Other outbuildings such as workshops are found on the larger plantations. The coffee processing system of wet pulping, developed exclusively by the French in this area required specific hydraulic infrastructure of cisterns, aqueducts and viaducts which are still visible in the landscape. Surviving vegetation illustrates the integration of coffee growing shaded by the natural forest or under fruit trees as well as French-style formal gardens that integrated local flora.La cultura material que sobrevivió de aquellas magnificas haciendas cafetaleras levantadas a finales de siglo XVIII y principios del siglo XIX, representan un testimonio valioso de la relación hombre – naturaleza. 

Criterion (ii): Las Primeras Plantaciones Cafetaleras del sudeste de Cuba conforman un conjunto de 171  edificaciones agroindustriales de finales del siglo XVIII y principios del siglo XIX que constituyen una muestra material de un acontecimiento histórico de gran importancia para el mundo, la Revolución Haitiana, este fenómeno trajo consigo elementos de una cultura determinada que tuvo sus manifestaciones, no solo en la obra arquitectónica, ingenieril o hidráulica, sino también en la economía, la música, la danza, la literatura, la gastronomía, la religión, el arte, los gustos y las costumbres que forman parte del patrimonio intangible, y que fue tan diferente del desarrollado en la isla antes de la llegada de los inmigrantes franco-haitianos.The remains of the 19th and early 20th century coffee plantations in eastern Cuba are unique and eloquent testimony to a form of agricultural exploitation of virgin forest, the traces of which have disappeared elsewhere in the world.

Criterion (iv): El complejo industrial cafetalero de la región sudoriental de Cuba, constituye el testimonio más antiguo de su tipo que ha sobrevivido de los orígenes de la cultura cafetera en el ámbito americano y el empleo del sistema húmedo de beneficios del café alcanzó su plenitud en la región y constituye así el antecedente del sistema moderno para el procesamiento del grano.The production of coffee in eastern Cuba during the 19th and early 20th centuries resulted in the creation of a unique cultural landscape, illustrating a significant stage in the development of this form of agriculture. 

Integrity

The Landscape of the First Coffee Plantations in the Southeast of Cuba has survived intact primarily due to the fact that the area was mostly abandoned in the early 20th century as this region’s traditional coffee growing techniques were increasingly unable to compete with new methods adopted elsewhere in Latin American. The large area included within the inscribed property, of 171 plantations in over 800 square kilometres, has permitted the preservation of a cultural landscape for coffee production from the agricultural level, to its processing, and the roads, trails and bridges that linked the product to market. Individual plantations include the owner’s house (often based on Basque traditions), aqueducts, flourmills, fermentation tanks, drying sheds, and barracks. 

Current threats to the inscribed property are primarily due to its status as a largely abandoned archaeological site and the reclamation of the landscape by nature. Efforts have been made to clear and fence plantations in order to protect them from intrusions. The region is an active tectonic zone with a history of earthquakes. In future, this area may come under increased threat from uncontrolled tourism and the exploitation of natural resources although currently accessibility to the majority of the cultural properties is very limited due to its isolation. Additional potential threats to the site are the possible effects of climate change on coffee plantations, particularly drought. 

Authenticity

The cafetales within the inscribed area illustrate a rich and complete history of an era of agricultural industry with significant material cultural. Surviving evidence includes examples of the ingenious system aqueducts and viaducts as well as of cisterns and mills used to pulp the berries required for the wet system of coffee production.  Plantation owners typically were of French or Haitian origin and created a distinct regional culture in their music, dance and gastronomy which continues to survive. 

Authenticity during the restoration process is maintained through careful excavation and study of some fifty archaeological sites along with the examination of written documentation such as wills, diaries, travellers’ accounts in Cuban and French archives.

The abandoned plantations exist in a variety of states of restoration. While the plantations have common features, each is distinct with its own unique elements.

Restoration projects undertaken at various plantations have been based on detailed archaeological and documentary research and applied authentic materials and techniques. Such projects have included the development of La Isabelica museum in the 1960s, and more recently the owner’s house at Ti Arriba plantation museum and the garden at San Juan de Escocia. Some of the original road infrastructure has been upgraded although most remain in their original form as simple mule tracks and footpaths. 

Protection and management requirements

The components of the inscribed property are owned by the Cuban government through various institutions of the Ministry of agriculture (Minagri). The national government provides for legal protection and conservation of the system of ruins from the French coffee plantation settlements through the National Monuments Commission. At the provincial level, this is the responsibility of the Provincial Cultural Heritage Centres with the involvement of the Santiago City Curator’s Office. 

Strong legislative protection is in force in the region, in particular within the Sierra Maestra Grand National Park (1980). Plantations within Guantanamo Province have special protection as part of regional planning regulations as part of the Nipe-Sagua-Baracoa mountain ridge area. 

Tourism development plans are focused on controlled tourism in defined areas linked by footpaths where motorized transportation is not possible. Additional undertakings, designed to improve the region’s socio-economic situation, have included economic development and soil use studies. 

Exceptionally, the inscribed property does not include a buffer zone due to its extent of territory covered with the inclusion of the 171 plantations along with the landscape between them.

Links
 View photos from OUR PLACE the World Heritage collection

Activities 2
World Heritage Programme for Small Island Developing States (SIDS)
Cultural Landscapes
News  1
World Heritage Committee Inscribes 61 New Sites on World Heritage List
30 November 2000
Events  1
Cultural Landscapes in the Caribbean: Identification and Safeguarding Strategies Workshop
7 Nov 2005 - 11 Dec 2005
Media
play_arrow Archaeological Landscape of the First Coffee ... (UNESCO/NHK)
play_arrow Archaeological Landscape of the First Coffee ... (UNESCO/NHK)
Cuba
Date of Inscription: 2000
Criteria: (iii)(iv)
Property : 81,475 ha

Dossier: 1008
Serial: yes

Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
Protections
by other conservation instruments

1 protection / 1 element

Biosphere Reserves (1 element)

Baconao

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026