World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Classical Weimar
Classical Weimar
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Classical Weimar

In the late 18th and early 19th centuries the small Thuringian town of Weimar witnessed a remarkable cultural flowering, attracting many writers and scholars, notably Goethe and Schiller. This development is reflected in the high quality of many of the buildings and of the parks in the surrounding area.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

In the late 18th and early 19th century the small Thuringian town of Weimar witnessed a remarkable cultural flowering, attracting many writers and scholars, notably Goethe (1749-1832) and Schiller (1759-1805). This development is reflected in the high quality of many buildings and parks in the surrounding area.

It was in the lifetime of Duchess Anna Amalia (1739-1809) that Weimar’s Classical period began. She appointed the poet Christoph Martin Wieland (1733-1813) as tutor to her sons in 1772. It was after Carl August (1757-1828) had succeeded to the Duchy that Johann Wolfgang Goethe settled in the town (1775). Johann Gottfried Herder (1744-1803) came to Weimar in the following year. The high point of the town's cultural influence resulted from the creative relationship between Goethe and Friedrich Schiller that began in 1794 and was intensified when Schiller moved to Weimar in 1799.

The World Heritage properties comprises twelve separate buildings or ensembles: Goethe's House and Goethe´s Garden and Garden House; Schiller's House; Herder Church, Herder House and Old High School; Residence Castle and Ensemble Bastille; Dowager's Palace (Wittumspalais); Duchess Anna Amalia Library; Park on the Ilm with the Roman House; Belvedere Castle and Park with Orangery; Ettersburg Castle and Park; Tiefurt Castle and Park; and Historic Cemetery with Princes´ Tomb.

Criterion (iii): The high artistic quality of the public and private buildings and parks in and around the town testify to the remarkable cultural flowering of the Weimar Classical Period.

Criterion (vi): Enlightened ducal patronage attracted many of the leading writers and thinkers in Germany, such as Goethe, Schiller, and Herder to Weimar in the late 18th and early 19th century, making it the cultural centre of the Europe of the day.

Integrity

Classical Weimar includes all elements necessary to express the Outstanding Universal Value of one of the most influential cultural centres in Europe. It is of adequate size to ensure the features and processes which convey the significance of the property.

Authenticity

Despite the considerable degree of restoration and reconstruction required as a result of wartime damage, the level of authenticity of these properties is high. Every effort has been made to use the extensive documentation available to ensure the accuracy of reconstruction work, and there has been scrupulous attention to the use of authentic materials in most cases.

Protection and management requirements

All components of the property, with the exception of the Historic Cemetery, are listed in the monuments list of the Free State of Thuringia (Denkmalbuch des Freistaates Thüringen), and are thus protected under the provisions of the relevant monuments protection law (Thüringer Denkmalschutzgesetz) of 7 January 1992. In addition, all except the City Church, Herder House, the Old High School, the Residence Castle, and the Historic Cemetery are covered by the law of 8 July 1994 establishing the Foundation Klassik Stiftung Weimar (Thüringer Gesetz über die Errichtung der Stiftung Weimarer Klassik). These laws impose strict controls over all activities in or around the components that may adversely affect their state of conservation or their surroundings.

The City Church and Herder House are church property, belonging to the Evangelical-Lutheran Congregation of Weimar (Evangelisch-lutherische Kirchgemeinde Weimar). The Old High School and the Historic Cemetery are owned by the City of Weimar. Part of the Residence Castle, theBastille  (Hofdamenhaus), is owned by the Foundation for Thuringian Castles and Gardens (Stiftung Thüringer Schlösser und Gärten). This body, like the Foundation Klassik Stiftung Weimar, which is the owner of the remaining components of the property, is a foundation under public law responsible for the management of public goods.

A management plan has been developed which prioritizes conservation measures and includes strategies for visitor management, risk prevention and development pressure. The management plan is given to local and regional government offices as a basis for planning and will serve as an implementation guide for the supervising administrations.

Links
Google Arts & Culture: Story

City of Weimar

Klassik Stiftung Weimar

 View photos from OUR PLACE the World Heritage collection

UNESCO Commission of Germany

Klassisches Weimar (Deutsche UNESCO-Kommission)

Activities 1
World Heritage Cities Programme
News  6
World Heritage sites participate in Earth Hour
28 March 2012
10th Weimar Summer Courses, “Milestones of Democracy – European Memories 2009”
25 June 2009
Anna Amalia Library re-opens after extensive restoration
5 November 2007
Re-opening of the Anna Amalia Library (World Heritage site of Classical Weimar) planned in October 2007 after the fire of 2004
15 December 2006
More add
Media
play_arrow Classical Weimar (UNESCO/NHK)
Germany
Date of Inscription: 1998
Criteria: (iii)(vi)
Dossier: 846
Serial: yes

Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2007 2005 2002 2001 2000
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026