World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Viking-Age Ring Fortresses
Viking-Age Ring Fortresses
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Viking-Age Ring Fortresses
These five archaeological sites comprise a system of monumental ring-shaped Viking-Age fortresses sharing a uniform geometric design. Constructed between about 970 and 980 CE, the fortresses at Aggersborg, Fyrkat, Nonnebakken, Trelleborg and Borgring were positioned strategically near important land and sea routes, and each made use of the natural topography of their surrounding landscape for defensive purposes. They are an emblematic demonstration of the centralized power of the Jelling Dynasty, and a testimony to the socio-political transformations that the Danish realm underwent in the late 10th century.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The ring fortresses of Aggersborg, Fyrkat, Nonnebakken, Trelleborg and Borgring, constructed between about 970 and 980 CE during the reign of King Harald ‘Bluetooth’ Gormsson, represent outstanding examples and technological mastery of military architecture. Strategically positioned close to important land and sea routes across the Jutland peninsula and on the islands of Funen and Zealand in present-day Denmark, all five enclosures were constructed based on a uniform, precise, geometric, scalable design, and incorporated elements of natural topography for defensive purposes. The structures included fortified circular ramparts with four gateways located close to the cardinal points. In most cases, they were equipped with a concentric ditch, axial streets encircled by a ring street, and rows of longhouses geometrically arranged in the four quadrants of the fortified ring.

While functioning for only a brief period, this chain of Viking-Age fortresses is representative of the largest monuments that illustrate the centralisation of power by the Danish Jelling Dynasty and the consolidation of the kingdom of Denmark under King Harald, who integrated a vast territory spreading from present-day northern Germany to Denmark, southern Sweden and Norway. This network demonstrates the existence of a strong royal authority that was able, through military operations and alliance building, to command sufficient resources to exert sovereign control over territorial waters, land traffic and trade.

The fortresses, the function of which can only be inferred, testify to the early stages of state formation and socio-political transformations of the late 10th century CE in the Danish kingdom, including the conversion to Christianity, which eventually triggered the progression of statehood and Christianity in the whole of Scandinavia, and heralded the beginning of the Middle Ages in Northern Europe.

Criterion (iii): The monumental scale of the Viking-Age ring fortresses, built in a precise manner and within a single decade, signifies a high degree of centralised control and is evidence of King Harald’s ability to muster military power, resources and a local workforce to create a coherent system of surveillance and control over a vast territory. The ring fortresses testify to Harald’s state-building ambitions and can be seen as an outstanding testament of the process of state formation and an expression of a cultural shift in the geo-cultural context of Scandinavia and Northern Europe.

Criterion (iv): The chain of fortresses represents an outstanding example of monumental military architecture in Scandinavia and an exceptional integrated system within the wider context of the European Viking Age. The network demonstrates high technical values of construction and the exceptionality of a strictly ordered geometry in scalable form. The precise manner in which all five ring fortresses were built over a short period of time testifies to the existence of centralised power that was required to manage such a monumental infrastructure project involving resource-intensive engineering. Their strategic positioning linked to the control of major land and sea routes, and their territorial spread, hint at a unified system of governance over a vast area.

Integrity

All the elements necessary to express the property’s Outstanding Universal Value are included within its boundaries. Archaeological deposits have been preserved at all five component parts sufficiently well to sustain the essential values of the property. The form of the excavated features survives intact in the subsoil. While the above-ground elements of the fortresses have suffered decay, the key structural elements of the Aggersborg, Fyrkat and Trelleborg enclosures are readable in the landscape. The Borgring and Nonnebakken fortresses are discernible only as small elevations, the latter being covered entirely by urban fabric. The landscape around the fortresses has changed substantially since the Viking Age due to natural and human-made factors. Elements of modern infrastructure have a visual impact on some of the individual component parts.

Authenticity

The original forms, designs, materials and substance of the ring fortresses have survived unaltered below ground at all five component parts, even in areas where archaeological excavations have taken place. The above-ground elements of the enclosures have been damaged due to various human activities and natural erosion over many centuries, and the landscapes of the five fortresses have evolved, but the strategic settings of the structures can still be comprehended. The five component parts contribute to the Outstanding Universal Value of the site as a whole, and the property does not suffer unduly from adverse effects of development and/or neglect.

Protection and management requirements

All five component parts are legally protected as ancient monuments at the national level through the Danish Museum Act (No. 1505 of 14 December 2006). At the municipal level, all of the fortresses are cited in the respective municipal plans, which are regulated by the Planning Act (No. 1027 of 20 October 2008). Spatial planning documents and special zoning restrictions provide additional protection to the property and the buffer zones.

The boundaries of the property reflect the highest level of national legal protection, with the exception of parts of Trelleborg and Borgring, where the process of extending the scheduled areas to cover the entire area of these component parts will depend on further archaeological investigations and negotiations with landowners. In these cases, the sections falling outside the scheduled areas are protected by compatible high-level nature protections.

Protection and management of the property reside at the highest level with the Danish Agency for Culture and Palaces. Management at the level of the component parts lies with the Danish Nature Agency at Aggersborg, the National Museum of Denmark at Fyrkat and Trelleborg, the Museum Southeast Denmark at Borgring, and the Odense City Museums at Nonnebakken. The management of the serial property will be coordinated by a Series Coordinator, responsible for the delivery of an integrated Property Management Plan (2023-2027) across all the component parts. A key mid- to long-term challenge will be to mitigate the negative visual impact modern infrastructure has on views to and from some of the component parts.

Links
Viking-Age Ring Fortresses

Denmark
Date of Inscription: 2023
Criteria: (iii)(iv)
Property : 51 ha

Buffer zone: 16,820.8 ha
Dossier: 1660
Serial: yes

Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

Protections
by other conservation instruments

2 protections / 2 elements

Geoparks (1 element)

The South Fyn Archipelago UNESCO Global Geopark
RAMSAR (1 element)

Vejlerne and Logstor Bredning

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026