World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Humberstone and Santa Laura Saltpeter Works
Humberstone and Santa Laura Saltpeter Works
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Assistance
Humberstone and Santa Laura Saltpeter Works

Humberstone and Santa Laura works contain over 200 former saltpeter works where workers from Chile, Peru and Bolivia lived in company towns and forged a distinctive communal pampinos culture. That culture is manifest in their rich language, creativity, and solidarity, and, above all, in their pioneering struggle for social justice, which had a profound impact on social history. Situated in the remote Pampas, one of the driest deserts on Earth, thousands of pampinos lived and worked in this hostile environment for over 60 years, from 1880, to process the largest deposit of saltpeter in the world, producing the fertilizer sodium nitrate that was to transform agricultural lands in North and South America, and in Europe, and produce great wealth for Chile. Because of the vulnerability of the structures and the impact of a recent earthquake, the site was also placed on the List of World Heritage in Danger to help mobilize resources for its conservation.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief Synthesis

In the remote desert Pampa, one of the driest deserts on earth, thousands of people lived and worked from the first half of the 19th century to process the largest deposit of saltpeter in the world, producing the fertiliser sodium nitrate that was to transform agricultural land in North and South America, and Europe, and produce great wealth for Chile.

Humberstone and Santa Laura works are the best preserved and most representative remains of a series of over 200 saltpeter works that once existed, all of which were interconnected by a specially built modern railway system, and constitute an exceptional testimony to technological progress and global exchanges which were the cornerstone of the industrial era. In this area, workers, drawn from Chile, Peru and Bolivia, to this hostile environment, lived in company towns and forged a distinctive communal Pampinos culture, manifest in their own rich language, creativity, and solidarity, and above all in pioneering struggles for social justice, that had a profound impact generally on social history.

The industrial heritage site was developed from 1872 and until mid 20th century; it is located 45 km. from the port of Iquique in the midst of a desert landscape.  The property covers a surface area of 573.48 hectares, with a buffer zone of 1,826.39 hectares that encompasses the two main sites which stand at a distance of approximately 1 km from each other. These complement each other, because the industrial area of Santa Laura is better conserved, while Humberstone has better preserved residential and service areas.

The site of Santa Laura conserves the remains of the industrial installations that were used for saltpeter processing such as industrial installations and equipment, including the only leaching shed and a saltpeter grinder that remain intact today, installations for manufacturing iodine, for energy production and buildings such as the administration house and the main square. The Humberstone site contains the attributes that express the quality of urban settlements, such as the living quarters, public spaces and the regular grid pattern of the Camp, with a main square around which communal buildings are clustered.  Other relevant attributes are the remains of the railway line that linked Santa Laura and Humberstone, the gravel heaps, the construction techniques, architectural styles and materials, in particular the costrón and the Pampa concrete,  distinctive construction materials together with the calamine and timber that were brought from other latitudes. 

The remains of saltpeter works are also present in the buffer zone which is also significant for the conservation of the characteristics of the natural setting of the Pampa which illustrate the relationship between the built environment and the adaptation to the natural setting.

The two saltpeter works are the most representative remaining vestiges of an industry that transformed the lives of a large proportion of the population of Chile, brought great wealth to the country.  The output of the industry, nitrate fertilisers, had indirectly a transforming influence on existing agricultural lands in Europe, and on newly cultivated land in other latitudes and indirectly supported the agricultural revolution of the late 19th century in many parts of the world. The remaining buildings are testimony to the social order and technical processes that drove the industry.

The pioneering social agenda of the saltpeter workers’ unions had far-reaching effects on labour laws throughout Chile and further afield. The distinctive culture of the Pampinos that evolved in association with the industry, which expresses the language, the memory of the saltpeter culture and its influence on social process, has resonance amongst the local population today and is another important attribute of the property. The place still has a strong symbolic and evocative association for the people from the Pampa, former workers and their families, who use the place for meetings and commemorations such as Saltpeter Week. 

Criterion (ii): The development of the saltpeter industry reflects the combined knowledge, skills, technology, and financial investment of a diverse community of people who were brought together from around South America, and from Europe. The saltpeter industry became a huge cultural exchange complex where ideas were quickly absorbed and exploited. The two works represent this process.

Criterion (iii): The saltpeter mines and their associated company towns developed into an extensive and very distinct urban community with its own language, organisation, customs, and creative expressions, as well as displaying technical entrepreneurship. The two nominated works represent this distinctive culture.

Criterion (iv): The saltpeter mines in the north of Chile together became the largest producers of natural saltpeter in the world, transforming the Pampa and indirectly the agricultural lands that benefited from the fertilisers the works produced. The two works represent this transformation process.

Integrity

The attributes at the nucleus of the complex of the two saltpeter works still reflect the key manufacturing processes and social structures and ways of life of these company towns. As opposed to what occurred in many other saltpeter works, Santa Laura and Humberstone were not fully dismantled when they were no longer functional. However, looting, demolition and lack of conservation and maintenance that occurred until the declaration of the site as a National Monument in 1970 compromised the overall integrity of the two works.

Efforts have been made by the State Party to reverse the conditions that threaten the integrity of the property.  Notwithstanding these works, interventions are still needed to ensure that no further erosion of integrity occurs, particularly by addressing the considerable damage that exists at some of the industrial structures in Santa Laura which are still at risk.

The State Party is stressing the multidisciplinary analysis of vulnerability of the materials and the instability of the structures, the assessment of the composition of the materials and their pathologies, the effect of environmental conditions on them, the soil and mechanical actions on structures, so as to identify the best methods of conserving and maintaining them and the use and historic functioning of machinery and buildings.

The buffer zone is an attempt to protect the desert landscape and its relationship with the built environment, as well as the remains from still older saltpeter works and mining camps, including railway lines and roads as well as pedestrian footpaths which give a certain sense to the historic reality of the saltpeter canton (complex of several interrelated saltpeter works). However, no formal buffer zone has been established to control and regulate activities that occur in the surroundings to mitigate the visual impacts on the setting derived from contemporary industrial buildings.

Authenticity

The two saltpeter works have remained better conserved that any other saltpeter works in the Pampa of northern Chile and what remains at the site is authentic and original.  The relatively few interventions, the lack of additions of architectural elements or constructive materials from outside or which are different from those used originally have helped in maintaining the authenticity of the property. 

The authenticity of the site is heightened as a result of its characteristics and its relationship to the landscape which illustrates the occupation of the territory in the saltpeter era and powerfully evokes how the desert was conquered. 

The conservation of manifestations of intangible attributes of the saltpeter era also contributes toward the authenticity of the site.  Humberstone houses the most important gathering of a commemoration of the industry as a whole: the Saltpeter Week which annually gathers together people from all over the Pampa; i.e. former saltpeter workers and their descendants.

However, there are significant challenges for the conservation of the conditions of authenticity, in light of the nature and vulnerability of the materials in the specific environmental conditions, and the identification of interventions which do not compromise these characteristics. 

Protection and management requirements

The property is a National Monument in the category of Historic Monument – the maximum level of protection of heritage in this country -.  It is administered by a private entity, the Saltpeter Museum Corporation, under the supervision of the National Monuments Council, a state institution responsible for the protection of Chile’s cultural heritage. A 2004-2009 Management Plan was produced and now needs to be updated. In addition, the human and financial resources for its sustained implementation will need to be secured and provided to the Corporation.

The formal definition of a buffer zone and the establishment and enforcement of regulatory measures is also an action that needs to be implemented as a crucial measure to protect the desert landscape both geographically as well as in relation to the remains of mining exploration and the transport of the saltpeter in general.

To ensure the conservation of Outstanding Universal Value, authenticity and integrity of the property, the Priority Interventions Plan needs to be implemented, including the structural consolidation and the recovery of buildings at risk.  Physical conservation must be addressed bearing in mind the effects of the camanchaca - dense and frequent mist generated by the Pacific Ocean - and its high saltiness, capable of seriously damaging metals, timbers and even stone materials.  It is necessary to conceptually reflect on authenticity which opens up a space coherently with replacing those pieces and sections that have irredeemably deteriorated, defining a criteria for change associated with that degradation, in order to maintain them for all time.  This must be done in addition to the protection of materials with anti-corrosion treatments.

An essential imperative for the protection, conservation and management of the site is an in-depth knowledge of the techniques, construction systems, and ways of life, exploration systems and the economic conditions at the time. The importance of the technology itself of this exploitation is of great singularity and the complexities of life associated with saltpeter impose a considerable challenge on how it is all interpreted.  Also essential is protecting, conserving and managing those artistic elements that are a part of the history of the site whilst it was functioning and being abandoned, such as the “graphic designs” on the walls, and the movable assets.

Links
Google Arts & Culture: Story

 View photos from OUR PLACE the World Heritage collection

Activities 1
Preparatory assistance for the inscription of the property and support for the management of the Humberstone and Santa Laura Saltpeter Works in Chile
News  3
International Day for Monuments and Sites 2021 - Complex Pasts: Diverse Futures
16 April 2021
The Humberstone and Santa Laura Saltpeter Works site (Chile), removed from the List of World Heritage in Danger
2 July 2019
Mostar, Macao and Biblical vestiges in Israel are among the 17 cultural sites inscribed on UNESCO’s World Heritage List
15 July 2005
Chile
Date of Inscription: 2005
Minor boundary modification inscribed year: 2011, 2019
Criteria: (ii)(iii)(iv)
Property : 573.48 ha

Buffer zone: 1,826.39 ha
Dossier: 1178ter
Province of Iquique
S20 12 20.952 W69 47 38.616
List of World Heritage in Danger

Inscription Year on the List of World Heritage in Danger

2005 -2019
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2021 2019 2018 2017 2016 2015 2014 2013 2012 2011 2010 2009 2008 2007 2006
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026