World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Arslantepe Mound
Arslantepe Mound
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Arslantepe Mound

Arslantepe Mound is a 30-metre-tall archaeological tell located in the Malatya plain, 15 km south-west of the Euphrates River. Archaeological evidence from the site testifies to its occupation from at least the 6th millennium BCE up until the Medieval period. The earliest layers belong to the Late Chalcolithic 1-2 periods, contemporary to Early Uruk in Southern Mesopotamia (4300-3900 BCE) and are characterized by adobe houses. The most prominent and flourishing period of the site was in the Late Chalcolithic 5 period, during which the so-called palace complex was constructed. Considerable evidence also testifies to the Early Bronze Age period, most prominently identified by the Royal Tomb complex. The archaeological stratigraphy then extends to the Middle and Late Bronze Ages and Hittite periods, including Neo-Hittite levels. The site illustrates the processes which led to the emergence of a State society in the Near East and a sophisticated bureaucratic system that predates writing. Exceptional metal objects and weapons have been excavated at the site, among them the earliest swords so far known in the world, which suggests the beginning of forms of organized combat as the prerogative of an elite, who -at Arslantepe- exhibited them as instruments of their new political power. 

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Arslantepe Mound is an archaeological tell of about 4.5 ha in extension, and 30 m high, at the heart of the fertile Malatya plain, 12 kilometres from the right bank of the Euphrates. The archaeological evidence of the site testifies to its occupation from at least the 6th millennium BCE up until the late Roman period. The most outstanding testimony of the site is documented in its remains of the Late Chalcolithic period, during which the palace complex was constructed. Considerable evidence also testifies other phases of occupation, such as the earlier Late Chalcolithic period characterized by adobe houses dating to the first half of the 4th millennium BCE and the Early Bronze Age period, most prominently identified by a Royal Tomb complex. The later archaeological finds also extend to the Paleo-Assyrian and Hittite periods, including Neo-Hittite levels.

The Arslantepe Mound presents a unique window into the Late Chalcolithic period, recording a specific moment in time, which testifies to elite life and the earliest forms of state administration. Due to an apparently sudden and violent destruction of the palace complex and surrounding structures in the late 4th millennium BCE, Arslantepe has preserved archaeological evidence of an exceptional state of preservation when compared to other settlements within the region. Important architectural attributes of the Late Chalcolithic period (3400-3100 BCE) include the settlement plan and layout of individual buildings, the construction technology, arrangement and thickness of walls as well as their surface treatments in the form of plaster and, where evident, wall paintings. The palace complex at the same time constitutes the largest unitary complex so far known dating to the late Chalcolithic period.

The extensive and systematic excavations of the palace complex, full of material in situ, have allowed to reconstruct the characteristics of this civilization, the life of these early elites and their activities in incomparable detail, enlightening this early period of establishment of governance and administration systems controlling the economy of the population and exercising a central political authority. The palace complex hence illustrates an exceptionally well-preserved testimony of the comparatively short period between 3400 and 3100 BCE, when Arslantepe was a centre of governance in the region.

Criterion (iii): Arslantepe presents an exceptional testimony to the life of early administrative elites in the Late Chalcolithic period and their relationship with the wider public. The archaeological evidence is exceptional in terms of its state of conservation and the level of detail preserved in architectural and archaeological evidence found at Arslantepe is highly unusual. As the result of a catastrophic and perhaps even violent event that led to the sudden destruction of the palace complex and other structures and thereby caused a sealing of evidence in the debris and rubble under collapsed walls, the property provides a complete and vivid picture of society and daily life of these early administrate elites.

Integrity

The physical remains of the property show an impressive state of preservation, which confirm the unusual intactness of the Late Chalcolithic period remains. All known areas of archaeological deposits are included within the boundaries of the property. The adobe remains of the Late Chalcolithic period, which is comparatively fragile, is protected under two roof shelters. As a large section of these layers is already excavated and sheltered, further evidence of these earlier layers shall be researched by means of non-invasive technologies to protect their future integrity.

The monumental palace complex of the 4th millennium BCE, in particular, has been widely exposed and preserved in an impressive state, with the original mud-brick walls, mud plaster and floors, internal features and paintings successively excavated over more than forty years. The progressively expanding research on the Hittite and Neo-Hittite period levels is in progress and can potentially bring to light new monuments of great historical and cultural value in the near future. However, like for the Late Chalcolithic layers, a cautious excavation strategy aimed at leaving a significant part of the property unexcavated and undisturbed is crucial.

Neither the property nor its buffer zone suffered from significant adverse effects with the exception of few residential developments in the south and southwest of the buffer zone, which are no longer permitted to occur within the established buffer zone restrictions under the adopted conservation development plan. As the visual integrity of the property is sensitive, any building activities within the property, as well as in its visual setting need to be carefully considered and assessed by means of Heritage Impact Assessments.

Authenticity

All archaeological structures and remains at Arslantepe and in particular the palace complex are authentic in material, substance, workmanship and in parts design and setting. No reconstructions have been undertaken. The mud-brick walls and the whole 4th millennium BCE architecture, including the internal mud features, plaster, wall paintings and floors remain in the excellent condition in which they were excavated.

The only interventions to these buildings were minor repairs undertaken, when necessary, by using the same original materials, i.e. mud and straw tempering. The roofing system itself has not damaged the structures, since it is supported by metal poles which do not stand on the walls, but on the floor, without perforating it and therefore do not cause any damage to the underlying archaeological levels. The entire palace complex has not been modified in any way and is protected maintaining its complete authenticity. The landscape silhouette around the site is acceptably preserved, as well. The archaeological finds excavated are important associated elements to the archaeological site, which can testify to its authenticity in terms of material remains, allowing to understand the availability of source materials and capacity for artistic and cultural production at different times.

Protection and management requirements

The property and its buffer zone are under protection by the Turkish Law for Preservation of Cultural and Natural Property, Law No.: 2863. Arslantepe Mound was registered as a 1st Degree Archaeological Conservation site by the decision of Adana Regional Conservation Council dated 20 January 1989, which provides it with the highest level of protection at national level. The boundaries were further enlarged by a decision 2145 of Sivas Regional Conservation Council dated 23 December 2010. The immediate setting of the site, which overlaps with the buffer zone, was defined as a 3rd Degree Archaeological Conservation zone. In order to protect the property’s setting a conservation development plan was developed by Battalgazi Municipality which indicates the legal conditions and restrictions for urban development.

The property is managed in cooperation by multiple institutions. At the local level, two institutions are responsible for the protection and management of the site: the site management unit under the direction of the Site Manager, which facilitates the management processes, in particular all coordination processes at the national, metropolitan or municipal level and which also coordinates the implementation of the site management plan, and the Malatya Museum, which supervises the cultural heritage resources of the region, including Arslantepe Mound. The museum is responsible for security, visitor access, cleaning and maintenance of the site and houses the collections of archaeological findings discovered during excavations. A third partner at an international level is the Excavation Director and Scientific Coordinator based at La Sapienza University in Rome, Italy. La Sapienza University is responsible for planning and carrying out the excavation seasons, active conservation measures and also acts as a management advisor all year round to the local team. Financial resources for the site include resources for the annual excavation seasons provided by the Italian archaeological expedition through the Italian Ministry of Foreign Affairs and an annual administration and maintenance budget provided by the Ministry of Culture and Tourism.

The management plan (2019-2024) was approved in January 2019 and is being expanded to integrate a risk management plan, which includes periodical detailed photographic documentation. The site manager has been in duty since the preparation phase of the management plan. In addition, as a part of the management structure, an “Advisory Board” and “Supervision and Coordination Board” has been established by the Ministry of Culture and Tourism. A conservation strategy and plan for the property, including a cautious strategy for anticipated archaeological research and excavations, that determines protocols, priorities and procedures for all forms of conservation, excavation and maintenance interventions is needed.

News  1
Four natural and three cultural sites added to UNESCO’s World Heritage List
26 July 2021
Türkiye
Date of Inscription: 2021
Criteria: (iii)
Property : 4.85 ha

Buffer zone: 69.22 ha
Dossier: 1622
N38 22 55.92 E38 21 39.93
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2025 2024 2023
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026