World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Djémila
Djémila
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Djémila

Situated 900 m above sea-level, Djémila, or Cuicul, with its forum, temples, basilicas, triumphal arches and houses, is an interesting example of Roman town planning adapted to a mountain location.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The site of Djémila is located 50 km north-east of the town of Sétif. Known under its antique name Cuicul, Djémila is an establishment of an ancient Roman colony founded during the reign of Nerva (96 - 98 A.D.). The Roman town occupied a singular defensive position. Cuicul is one of the flowers of Roman architecture in North Africa.  Remarkably adapted to the  constraints of the mountainous site, on a rocky spur which spreads at an altitude of 900 m, between the wadi Guergour and the wadi Betame, two mountain torrents, the town has its own Senate and Forum. Around the beginning of the 3rd century, it expanded beyond its ramparts with the creation of the Septimius Severus Temple, the Arch of Caracalla, the market and the civil basilica. The site has also been marked by Christianity in the form of several cult buildings: a cathedral, a church and its baptistry are considered among the biggest of the Paleochristian period. The site of Djémila comprises an impressive collection of mosaic pavings, illustrating mythological tales and scenes of daily life.

Criterion (iii): Djémila bears exceptional testimony to a civilization which has disappeared. It is one of the world's most beautiful Roman ruins. The archaeological vestiges, the well integrated Roman urban planning and the surrounding environment comprise the elements that represent the values attributed to this site.

Criteron (iv): Djémila is an outstanding example of a type of architectural ensemble illustrating a significant stage in Roman history of North Africa, from the 2nd to the 6th centuries. In this instance, the classic formula of Roman urban planning has been adapted to the geophysical constraints of the site.  The site comprises a very diversified typological and architectural repertoire with a defensive system and Arch of Triumph, public convenience and theatre buildings, facilities for crafts and commerce, including the market of the Cosinus brothers that constitutes remarkable evidence of economic prosperity of the city.

Integrity

The site, fenced in following the boundaries presented at the time of inscription on the World Heritage List, contains all the elements necessary to express its Outstanding Universal Value. These attributes comprise among others, the classic formula of Roman urban planning with two gates located at each end of the Cardo Maximus; in the centre, is the Forum surrounded by buildings essential to the functioning of public life: the Capitoleum, the Curia, a civil basilica, the Basilica Julia. The vestiges of the Temple of Venus Genitrix and aristocratic residences richly decorated with mosaics are also visible. Vestiges of monuments that have marked the expansion of the city to the south are also included. They comprise private dwellings and public buildings such as the Arch of Caracalla (216), the Temple of Gens Septimia (229), a theatre with a capacity of 3,000 places, baths, basilicas and other cult buildings. The archaeological vestiges have remained surprisingly intact over the centuries. Conservation of the site is not threatened by tourism. However, it is under threat from earthquakes, drought, fire, vandalism, robbing and looting, illegal grazing, illegal constructions and badly integrated infrastructure.

Authenticity

The archaeological vestiges excavated since 1909 bear true and credible testimony to Roman town components such as the classic plan of the Roman town and urban fabric, and architecture such as construction methods (roads, gates, aqueduct, colonnaded temple, theatre, etc.), decoration (bas-reliefs, borders and pediments, capitals of columns, mosaics etc.) and construction material (stone, mosaic, ceramics, etc.) that represent the Outstanding Universal Value of the property. Some restoration work on the mosaics in the site museum has been carried out in recent years.

Protection and management requirements

Protection of the site relates to nationals Laws No. 90-30 (1990) and No. 98-04 (1998) concerning the protection of Algerian cultural heritage.  Management of the site is entrusted to the Office of Cultural Properties Management and Exploitation (OGEBC) and everyday management of the site is the responsibility of the site manager. The OGEBC is responsible, other than public service demands for protection, maintenance and presentation, to implement the protection plan and presentation of the site (PPMVSA) in coordination with the Directorate for Culture of the Wilaya of Sétif, and specifically the service responsible for conservation and presentation of cultural heritage.

The protection measures foreseen to preserve the values of the property mainly concern the construction of a peripheral fence around the site, the restoration of damaged mosaics and the renovation of the site museum (completed).  It is also hoped that the enforcement of current regulations and a regular monitoring activity of the site will be implemented.

Although deterioration causes increasing damage to the fragile archaeological structures (low walls), globally the values are well conserved.  The need for funds and international assistance is still very important for the implementation of the management plan and presentation of the site, revised annually.  Each year, 30,000 visitors and some 15,000 students visit the site.

Links
Office National de Gestion et d’Exploitation des Biens Culturels Protégés' Facebook Page (in French only)

National Office for the Management and Exploitation of Protected Cultural Property's website page(only in French)

Publications
Ennabli, Abdelmajid. "North Africa's Roman art. Its future" in North Africa's Roman art. Its future , September 2000, pp 18-29
Activities 1
Improving the connection between heritage and young people in archaeological sites in Djémila (Algeria)
Events  1
Bikeabout To Launch Circum-Mediterranean Tour Of World Heritage Sites
24 Sep 1997 - 30 Jun 1998
Media
play_arrow Djémila (UNESCO/NHK)
Algeria
Date of Inscription: 1982
Criteria: (iii)(iv)
Property : 30.6 ha

Dossier: 191
Wilaya (province) of Setif
N36 19 14.016 E5 44 12.012
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026