World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Painted Churches in the Troodos Region
Painted Churches in the Troodos Region
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Painted Churches in the Troodos Region

This region is characterized by one of the largest groups of churches and monasteries of the former Byzantine Empire. The complex of 10 monuments included on the World Heritage List, all richly decorated with murals, provides an overview of Byzantine and post-Byzantine painting in Cyprus. They range from small churches whose rural architectural style is in stark contrast to their highly refined decoration, to monasteries such as that of St John Lampadistis.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The Troodos mountain region of Cyprus contains one of the largest groups of churches and monasteries of the former Byzantine Empire. The ten monuments included on the World Heritage List, all richly decorated with murals, provide an overview of Byzantine and post-Byzantine painting in Cyprus and bear testimony to the variety of artistic influences affecting Cyprus over a period of 500 years. The structures display elements that were specific to Cyprus and were determined by its geography, history and climate, including steep-pitched wooden roofs with flat hooked tiles, in some cases providing a second roof over Byzantine masonry domes and vaulted forms, while exhibiting Byzantine metropolitan art of the highest quality. The architecture of these churches is unique, confined to the Troodos range and almost certainly of indigenous origin. They range from small churches whose rural architectural style is in stark contrast to their highly refined decoration, to monasteries such as that of St John Lampadistis. They also contain a wealth of dated inscriptions, an uncommon feature in the Eastern Mediterranean during the Middle Ages, which makes them particularly important for recording the chronology of Byzantine painting. Important examples of the 11th century iconography survive in the churches of St. Nicholas of the Roof and Panagia Phorbiotissa of Nikitari. Within Panagia tou Arakou in Lagoudera and St. Nicholas of the Roof are found important wall paintings from the Comnenian era, with the first being of exceptional artistic quality attributed to Constantinopolitan masters. The 13th century, the early period of Latin (western) rule in Cyprus, is well represented in the wall paintings of St. John Lampadistis in Kalopanagiotis and in Panagia in Moutoulla, which reflect the continuing Byzantine tradition and new external influences. The 14th century wall paintings at Panagia Phorbiotissa, Timios Stavros at Pelendri and St. John Lampadistis also display both local and Western influences, and to a certain degree, the revived art of Paleologan Constantinople. In the late 15th century iconography at Timios Stavros Agiasmati and Archangelos Michael, Pedoulas exhibits once again the harmonious combination of Byzantine art with local painting tradition, as well as some elements of Western influence, which are different, however, from the earlier series of St. John Lampadistis that was painted by a refugee from Constantinople. The Venetian rule, which began in 1489 was reflected in the development of the Italo-Byzantine school, and the most sophisticated examples can be found in Panagia Podhithou and the north chapel of St. John Lampadistis, both successful examples of Italian Renaissance art and Byzantine art fusion. Finally, the wall paintings of the Church of the Transfiguration of the Savior in Palaichori form part of the Cretan school of the 16th century.

The ten churches included in the serial inscription are: Ayios Nikolaos tis Stegis (St. Nicholas of the Roof), Kakopetria; Ayios Ioannis (St. John) Lambadhistis Monastery, Kalopanayiotis; Panayia (The Virgin) Phorviotissa (Asinou), Nikitari; Panayia (The Virgin) tou Arakou, Lagoudhera; Panayia (The Virgin), Moutoullas; Archangelos Michael (Archangel Michael), Pedhoulas; Timios Stavros (Holy Cross), Pelendria;  Panayia (The Virgin) Podhithou, Galata; Stavros (Holy Cross) Ayiasmati, Platanistasa, and the Church of Ayia Sotira (Transfiguration of the Savior), Palaichori. Of the ten churches nine are situated in the District of Nicosia and one, Timios Stavros (Holy Cross), Pelendria is in the District of Limassol.

Criterion (ii): Although the existence of any direct influence cannot be confirmed, very close relationships existed, during the 12th century, between painting in Cyprus and Western Christian art (stylistic relationships in the case of Nikitari paintings; iconographical relationships in the case of the paintings of Lagoudera). Thus, there do exist some answers to the very complex question of ties between the two Christianities. These answers take the form of Cypriot monuments, which precede the constitution of the Frankish Lusignan Kingdom, which was a fundamental link in the chain of East-West artistic exchanges.

Criterion (iii): The paintings of the Troodos Region bear an outstanding testimony to the Byzantine civilization at the time of the Comnenes, thanks to the Nikitari and Lagoudera ensembles. It should be noted that the former, where the name Alexis Comnene is mentioned in a dedication, was probably executed by artists from Constantinople and the latter was painted at the very time of the fall of Isaac Comnene and the sale of Cyprus to Guy de Lusignan.

Criterion (iv): The churches of the Troodos Region are a well conserved example of rural religious architecture during the Byzantine period. The refinement of their décor provides a contrast with their simple structure. The latest post-Byzantine painters alone, with their “rustic” style, are at times in harmony with this vernacular architecture.

Integrity

The wholeness or intactness of the site is related to the fact that all ten churches of the property are living monuments and continue to be used as places of worship and for other religious practices, thus preserving their original function. They individually retain their architectural fabric and their rich decoration, which separately form a whole assemblage and together complete a set that exhibit Byzantine and post-Byzantine painting in Cyprus. Their surroundings, which in most cases consist of rural countryside, augment their rural exterior in contrast to their décor. Their good state of preservation is directly related to the actions taken by the state, as conservation works are carried out on a yearly basis to the buildings, the wall paintings and wooden furniture, as well as the surrounding areas of the churches. An issue affecting the site is the increasing number of visitors, which occasionally results in pressure from the local church authorities for new facilities incompatible with the character and value of the monuments. In addition, an increase in criminal activities such as robberies has been observed in the past years, enabled by the rural location. Natural disasters and environmental pressures are also associated with the geography of the site, while development pressures arise occasionally. Measures have been implemented to mitigate these threats.

Authenticity

The key elements of the property – the design, materials, execution and function of the churches – retain a high degree of authenticity. The works undertaken for conservation of the structures and the wall paintings are implemented in a manner that respects the original material and its aesthetic value, without compromising the authenticity of the monuments. The religious functions, the environmental, cultural and historical factors that shaped the site are still evident today and through the collective efforts of the Department of Antiquities, the local communities and the church authorities, their preservation is pursued.

Protection and management requirements

The management of the site is under the direct supervision of the Curator of Ancient Monuments and the Director of the Department of Antiquities. Cultural and archaeological heritage in Cyprus is protected and managed according to the provisions of the national legislation, i.e. the Antiquities Law and the International Treaties signed by the Republic of Cyprus. In accordance with the Antiquities Law, Ancient Monuments are categorized as of the First Schedule (governmental ownership) and of the Second Schedule (private ownership). The churches included in the site “Painted Churches of the Troodos Region” are listed as Ancient Monuments of the Second Schedule and their legal owner is the Church of Cyprus. The national legislation, with regard to monuments listed as of the Second Schedule, requires written authorization from the competent authority, i.e. the Department of Antiquities, before any intervention may take place. In this framework, the responsibility for the protection of the churches is shared between the State and the various church authorities. However, the inscription of these monuments on the UNESCO World Heritage List led the State to undertake the management of the site in order to avoid any arbitrary interventions on the monuments. The entire cost of conservation works is now funded by the Department of Antiquities from the annual budget. Furthermore, the Law provides, under Section II article 11, for the establishment of Controlled Areas within the vicinity of the sites. According to article 11, the Director of the Department of Antiquities controls the height and architectural style of any building proposed for erection within the Controlled Area, in order to safeguard the historic and the archaeological character, the amenities and the environment surrounding an Ancient Monument. Such Controlled Areas have been defined for the churches included in the serial property.

The ten churches continue to be used as places of worship and for religious practices. The continuous use of all the churches for religious ceremonies is a decisive factor for delivering social benefits. At the same time, the churches constitute important visitor attractions and are open to the public for no entrance fee. Local people are fully involved in the management of the site as these churches are the property of the local church authorities and the responsibility for making the monuments accessible to visitors is vested in them.

Pressures on the property are being addressed through increased monitoring by the Department of Antiquities and installation of theft and fire alarm systems in the ten churches, together with the creation of Controlled Areas and further expropriation of lands in the vicinity of the churches.

Once finalised and agreed upon, the Management Plan prepared by the Department of Antiquities shall address the conservation, promotion and preservation needs of the serial property, and will aim for the preservation of its unique value for future generations by producing basic guidelines and policies for all the parties involved. The serial property Painted Churches in the Troodos Region was given enhanced protection status by the Committee for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict in November 2010.

Links
World Heritage Sites of Cyprus

News  2
Four World Heritage sites in Cyprus and Italy granted “enhanced protection” in the event of armed conflict
29 November 2010
World Heritage Committee Inscribes 31 New Sites on the World Heritage List
13 December 2001
Cyprus
Date of Inscription: 1985
Significant modifications to the boundaries : 2001
Criteria: (ii)(iii)(iv)
Property : 3.693 ha

Dossier: 351bis
Serial: yes

Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
Protections
by other conservation instruments

3 protections / 3 elements

2003 Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage (1 element)

Byzantine chant
Geoparks (1 element)

Troodos UNESCO Global Geopark
Second Protocol to the 1954 Hague Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict (1 element)

Painted Churches in the Troodos region

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026