World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Roman Walls of Lugo
Roman Walls of Lugo
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Roman Walls of Lugo

The walls of Lugo were built in the later part of the 3rd century to defend the Roman town of Lucus. The entire circuit survives intact and is the finest example of late Roman fortifications in western Europe.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Roman Walls of Lugo, a city in the Autonomous Region of Galicia in north-western Spain, are an exceptional architectural, archaeological and constructive legacy of Roman engineering, dating from the 3rd and 4th centuries AD. The Walls are built of internal and external stone facings of slate with some granite, with a core filling of a conglomerate of slate slabs and worked stone pieces from Roman buildings, interlocked with lime mortar.

Their total length of 2117 m in the shape of an oblong rectangle occupies an area of 1.68 ha. Their height varies between 8 and 10 m, with a width of 4.2 m, reaching 7 m in some specific points. The walls still contain 85 external towers, 10 gates (five of which are original and five that were opened in modern times), four staircases and two ramps providing access to the walkway along the top of the walls, one of which is internal and the other external. Each tower contained access stairs leading from the intervallum to the wall walk of town wall, of which a total of 21 have been discovered to date.

The defences of Lugo are the most complete and best preserved example of Roman military architecture in the Western Roman Empire.

Despite the renovation work carried out, the walls conserve their original layout and the construction features associated with their defensive purpose, with walls, battlements, towers, fortifications, both modern and original gates and stairways, and a moat.

Since they were built, the walls have defined the layout and growth of the city, which was declared a Historical-Artistic Ensemble in 1973, forming a part of it and becoming an emblematic structure that can be freely accessed to walk along. The local inhabitants and visitors alike have used them as an area for enjoyment and as a part of urban life for centuries.

Criterion (iv): The Roman walls of Lugo are the finest surviving example of late Roman military fortifications.

Integrity

Roman Walls of Lugo visibly conserve their original layout and more than half of their original towers and defensive structures, gates, stairways and other elements, together with a large number of archaeological remains from the period, which help to situate the structure within its historical context, and bear witness to its creation and evolution. The property boundaries include the whole fortifications, while the intramural and extramural areas are included in a buffer zone.

Very few monumental complexes can offer the same historical authenticity and archaeological integrity, both in terms of their size and their inclusion within an urban setting, and their continued use, as part of a wider and increasingly well-known context offering a large number of archaeological remains associated with the monument. Its originality was confirmed by the findings that have been made and the studies carried out on its full layout and structure, on the moat, or on the recovery of its original gateways and stairways, all solid proof of its Roman origins (from between the third and fourth centuries AD).

The use of local materials such as slate, granite and other stones that were re-used in the construction process gives the late imperial walls an original appearance, further enhanced by the fact that their perimeter and upper walkway are completely intact.

Pressures affecting the Roman Walls include the effects of the use of transport infrastructure, water and relative humidity but these are all minor and under control.

Authenticity

The authenticity of the Roman Walls of Lugo lies in the way that they have survived intact for eighteen centuries. There have been many interventions over that long period to individual parts of the walls for practical and aesthetic purposes, which mean that they do not survive in their precise original form, and so, using a restricted interpretation, they might be considered to be lacking in some measure of authenticity. However, as an ensemble their authenticity is impeccable.

Protection and management requirements

The legal framework that controls interventions carried out on the monument has its origins in the Spanish Constitution, in the Statute of Autonomy of Galicia, Organic Law 1/1981 of 6 April, and in Royal Decree 2434/1982 of 24 July on the transfer of functions and services from the State Authorities to the Autonomous Region of Galicia in cultural matters. Roman Walls of Lugo is considered as an Asset of Cultural Interest by the Royal Order of April 16, 1921, giving it the highest legal protection of their cultural values.

Any intervention involving the Walls or their surrounding area must comply with the specific regulations on the protection of cultural heritage at national level, as set out in Law 16/1985 on Spanish Historical Heritage, and regional regulations set out in Law 8/1995 on the Cultural Heritage of Galicia.

This regulatory framework involves the collaboration of three public authorities who are responsible for protecting the monument: the central State Authorities, the Regional Authorities of the Xunta de Galicia, and the local authorities of Lugo City Council. This collaboration between the different authorities is the basis for the direct management of the monument, carried out by the Xunta de Galicia as the owner and responsible authority for its care within the autonomous region.

All restoration and maintenance work on the Roman Walls is carried out in strict compliance with the directives of the Advance Integral Plan for the Conservation and Restoration of the Walls of Lugo.

Lugo City Council is responsible for managing actions carried out on the Walls in accordance with the stipulations of the Special Plan for the Protection, Rehabilitation and Reformation of the Walled Area of the City of Lugo and its Area of Influence. The municipality has begun a series of interventions aimed at preserving the monument, which essentially consist of protecting it from traffic and pollution by turning the road that runs around the walls into a pedestrian walkway, and by creating an interior pedestrian walkway that relieves the adjacent structures with a series of green spaces along their whole extent. All of these plans focus on a process of renovation, rehabilitation and enhancement of Lugo’s cultural heritage, represented in a building that has been specially built for this purpose, the Visitors’ Centre for the Walls.

Notes

Following a survey of ownership carried out in the late 1960s, ownership of the totality of the walls was vested in 1973 in the Spanish State, through the Ministry of Education and Science. It was transferred to the Xunta de Galicia by Royal Decree in 1994.

 The Spanish Constitution reserves certain rights in relation to the heritage to the central government. However, these are delegated to the competent agencies in the Autonomous Communities, in this case the Xunta de Galicia. For the Lugo walls the Xunta is in the position of both owner and competent agency. Under the Galician Heritage Law the Xunta is required to cooperate with the municipal authorities in ensuring the protection and conservation of listed monuments, and certain functions are delegated down to them. The Xunta operates through its General Directorate of Cultural Heritage (Dirección General de Patrimonio Cultural), based in Santiago de Compostela.

The Master Plan for the Conservation and Restoration of the Roman Walls of Lugo (1992) covered proposals for actions to be taken in respect of research and techniques of restoration. This was followed in 1997 by the Special Plan for the Protection and Internal Reform of the Fortified Enceinte of the Town of Lugo, which is concerned principally with the urban environment of the historic town. However, it has a direct impact on the protection afforded to the walls, in terms of traffic planning, the creation of open spaces, and regulation of building heights. Another planning instrument which affects the walls is the Special Plan for the Protection of the Miño [river], approved by the municipality at the beginning of 1998.

There is at the present time no management plan sensu stricto for the walls in operation in Lugo: work is continuing on the basis of the 1992 plan. Nor is there a technical unit specifically responsible for the conservation and restoration of the walls. It is against this background that serious consideration is being given to the creation of an independent foundation, under royal patronage and with representatives from government, academic, voluntary, and business institutions, to work with the General Directorate of Cultural Heritage of Galicia. The work plan of this body would include the development and implementation of integrated conservation, restoration, and maintenance programmes.

Links
Google Arts & Culture: Story

Ministry of Culture and Sports (in Spanish)

Turismo de Galicia

 View photos from OUR PLACE the World Heritage collection

Activities 1
World Heritage Cities Programme
News  2
International Day for Monuments and Sites 2021 - Complex Pasts: Diverse Futures
16 April 2021
World Heritage Committee Inscribes 61 New Sites on World Heritage List
30 November 2000
Media
play_arrow Roman Walls of Lugo (UNESCO/NHK)
Spain
Date of Inscription: 2000
Criteria: (iv)
Property : 1.68 ha

Buffer zone: 59.88 ha
Dossier: 987
Province of Lugo, Autonomous Community of Galicia
N43 0 38.307 W7 33 11.052
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

Protections
by other conservation instruments

1 protection / 1 element

Biosphere Reserves (1 element)

Terras do Miño

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026