World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Ancient Building Complex in the Wudang ...
Ancient Building Complex in the Wudang Mountains
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Ancient Building Complex in the Wudang Mountains

The palaces and temples which form the nucleus of this group of secular and religious buildings exemplify the architectural and artistic achievements of China's Yuan, Ming and Qing dynasties. Situated in the scenic valleys and on the slopes of the Wudang mountains in Hubei Province, the site, which was built as an organized complex during the Ming dynasty (14th–17th centuries), contains Taoist buildings from as early as the 7th century. It represents the highest standards of Chinese art and architecture over a period of nearly 1,000 years.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value
Brief synthesis

The palaces and temples of the Ancient Building Complex are located amongst the peaks, ravines and gullies of the picturesque Wudang Mountains, Hubei Province. Established as a Taoist centre from the early Tang Dynasty, some Taoist buildings could be traced back to the 7th century. However the surviving buildings exemplify the architectural and artistic achievements of China’s secular and religious buildings of the Yuan, Ming and Qing dynasties. The Ancient Building Complex reached its apogee during the Ming dynasty, with 9 palaces, 9 monasteries, 36 nunneries and 72 temples, following the major building campaign undertaken by Emperor Zhu Di to align his imperial regime with Taoism. Today, 53 ancient buildings and 9 architectural sites survive, including the Golden Shrine and the Ancient Bronze Shrine, which are prefabricated buildings in bronze made in 1307; the stone-walled Forbidden City of 1419; Purple Heaven Palace built originally in the 12th century, rebuilt in the 15th century and extended in the 19th century; the Nanyang Palace of the 12th and 13thcenturies; the Fuzhen Temple of the 15th and 17th centuries and the stone Zhishi-Xuanyue Gateway built to mark the entrance to the Wudang Mountains in 1522.

The buildings in the Wudang Mountains exhibit exceptional architectural art and technology and represent the highest level of Chinese art and architecture achieved over a period of nearly 1,000 years. They are examples of religious and secular buildings closely associated with the growth of Taoism in China and lavishly endowed by successive Emperors. As an exceptionally large and well-preserved Taoist building complex it is important material evidence for studying early Ming politics and the Chinese history of religion.

Criterion (i): The ancient buildings in the Wudang Mountains represent the highest standards in Chinese art and architecture over a period of nearly one thousand years.

Criterion (ii): The Wudang buildings exercised an enormous influence on the development of religious and public art and architecture in China.

Criterion (vi): The religious complex in the Wudang Mountains was the centre of Taoism, one of the major eastern religions and one which played a profound role in the development of belief and philosophy in the region.

Integrity

All the 62 ancient buildings and sites have been included in the property boundaries surrounded by extensive buffer zones with signs and enhanced safety control. Meanwhile, guided by the principle of “giving priority to the protection of cultural relics and attaching primary importance to their rescue”, priority is given to each building in terms of maintenance and repairs to ensure the integrity of the property.

Authenticity

Besides carrying out necessary works on the property such as cleaning, reinforcement, termite prevention and lightning conductors, the principle of respecting the authenticity is strictly adhered in terms of maintenance and repair, so that the original condition of the property in terms of layout, specification, style and material are all preserved. Meanwhile, the setting of the property has been improved by relocating residents out of the property area, which helps to preserve the authenticity as well as to restore the original setting.

According to the planned national water diversion project from the south to the north, the local water level is to rise 15 meters. As a result, some ancient buildings may need to be elevated, while some others may need to be relocated, which may impact the authenticity and integrity of the property.

Protection and management requirements

The property is protected at the highest level by the Law of the People’s Republic of China on the Protection of Cultural Relics. The Management Committee of the Wudang Mountains Tourism and Economic Special Zone where the property is located exercises the local governmental responsibility, and is exclusively in charge of protection, management, development, use, planning and construction of the Wudang Mountains scenery area. The Cultural Heritage Bureau under the Management Committee is responsible for the administration of cultural heritage in the Special Zone. The Institute for Cultural Heritage Conservation, a museum and 5 cultural heritage management departments are set under the Bureau to carry out conservation works. Among them, the 5 cultural heritage management departments are established according to the distribution of cultural heritage over the Mountains, and have clearly assigned scope of jurisdiction and staff. With regard to the 28 remote heritage sites, voluntary conservators’ tenders coming from the villages where these sites are located take care of them. At present, there are 84 such conservators that are professionally engaged in cultural heritage conservation.

Meanwhile, the “Four Legal Prerequisites” (demarcation of the boundaries, erection of an official plaque declaring a site a protected entity, creation of an archive for records, designation of an organization or person dedicated to management) and ‘five bring into’ (bring into the economic and society development plan, bring into urban and rural construction plan, bring into the fiscal budget, bring into system reform, bring into leadership accountability system) for cultural heritage conservation have been achieved, and the heritage monitoring system and database have been established.

The Outline of the Master Plan of Wudang Mountains Scene Area, the Twelfth Five-year (2011-2015) Conservation Plan for the Ancient Building Complex in Wudang Mountains, Regulations of Wudang Mountains Environment and Regulations on Basic Construction in the Planned Area of Wudang Special Zone have been formulated, and the provincial government has issued laws and regulations including the Regulations of Wudang Mountain Scene Area. The Master Plan for Cultural Heritage Conservation of Wudang Mountain is under preparation.

Moreover, the top-level protection zone inside the Scenic Area has been expanded to coincide with the property boundaries. Farmers living in the property area have been relocated for better protection of the sites, while all constructions impairing the setting of the property have been demolished.

The property is properly managed and preserved through periodic, strict and well planned maintenance and protection.

Links
Official Weibo account of the Tourism Bureau of the Wudang Mountains Special (in Chinese only)

Administrative Committee of the Wudang Mountains Special Zone of Tourist Economy (in Chinese only)

News  1
Fire Destroys Yuzhengong Palace in Hubei Province of China
5 February 2003
Media
play_arrow Ancient Building Complex in the Wudang Mountains (UNESCO/NHK)
China
Date of Inscription: 1994
Criteria: (i)(ii)(vi)
Dossier: 705
Danjiangkou City, Hubei Province
N32 28 0.012 E111 0 0
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2025 2023 2021 2018 2016 2014 2013 2004 2003 1998
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026