World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Amiens Cathedral
Amiens Cathedral
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Amiens Cathedral

Amiens Cathedral, in the heart of Picardy, is one of the largest 'classic' Gothic churches of the 13th century. It is notable for the coherence of its plan, the beauty of its three-tier interior elevation and the particularly fine display of sculptures on the principal facade and in the south transept.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief description

Located in the Hauts-de-France region, in the Department of the Somme, Amiens Cathedral is one of the largest churches in France and one of the most complete 13th century Gothic churches. The rigorous coherence of its plan, with the perfect symmetry of the nave and choir on either side of the transept, the beauty of its three-tier interior elevation, the audacious lightness of its structure that marks a new stage towards the conquest of luminosity, the wealth of its sculpted decoration and its stained glass makes it one of the most remarkable examples of medieval architecture.

Amiens Cathedral was built in less than a century with a high degree of continuity, the master builders being united by strong links (Robert de Luzarches (1220-1223), then his assistant, Thomas de Cormont (1223-1228), then his son, Renaud (1228-1288)). The unity of its conception and realization significantly testify to the values associated with this example of a remarkably conserved Gothic cathedral.

Criterion (i): Amiens Cathedral, mainly built between 1220 to 1288, is a masterpiece of Gothic architecture for the beauty of its interior elevation, its prodigious sculpted decoration and its stained glass.

Criterion (ii): Amiens Cathedral exercised an important influence on the later development of Gothic architecture. Several of the solutions retained at Amiens heralded the advent of the flamboyant style in monumental architecture and sculpture.

Integrity

Throughout the centuries, Amiens Cathedral has preserved its architectural expression and its cultural functions. The attributes that express its Outstanding Universal Value present a remarkable intactness. All the key architectural elements are included within the boundaries of the property and are in a good state of conservation.

Authenticity

Amiens Cathedral possesses excellent authenticity and significantly illustrates the radiating Gothic style that marked the 13th century. Numerous evolutive episodes over the centuries that followed have marked the building without changing its nature. From 1292 to 1375, the cathedral was enriched with a series of chapels built between the buttresses of the side aisles. With the spire constructed above the transept crossing, the choir screen and the splendid canonical sculpted wood stalls, the cathedral assumed, at the end of the Middle Ages, the physiognomy by which it is known today. Minor restorations during the Renaissance and in the 18th century, in particular inside the cathedral, enriched the decor and consolidated the building. On the whole, the cathedral was spared from two main episodes of vandalism, the wars of religion and the French Revolution, practically causing no damage.  It was restored in the 19th century by Eugène Viollet-le-Duc, opening up the choir with major restoration involving only the “Galerie des Sonneurs” above the façade, changing the style and aspect.

The building was largely spared during both World Wars.

Protection and management requirements

Amiens Cathedral has been fully listed as a Historic Monument since 1862. All building work is controlled by the State (Ministry of Culture) that finances and implements the necessary conservation work.

Amiens Cathedral is State-owned and managed in part by the Centre for National Monuments (a public body under the authority of the Ministry of Culture), the territorial collectivity and the clergy. Legally, it is of the Catholic doctrine.

A management plan for the property is under preparation. It will designate the role of each of the partners involved in the management of the property, its protection and its enhancement (State, Amiens city, agglomeration community, clergy).

In 2007, at the time of the preparation of the local town plan, a modified protective perimeter was set up in accordance with the Heritage Code. This protective primeter constitues the buffer zone of the property.

Links
Bienvenue sur le site E-Cathédr@le (in French)

Life of a Cathedral: Notre-Dame of Amiens

Amiens Tourism

Welcome to the towers and treasure of Amiens Cathedral (in French)

Media
play_arrow Amiens Cathedral (UNESCO/NHK)
play_arrow NHK World Heritage 100 Series
France
Date of Inscription: 1981
Minor boundary modification inscribed year: 2013
Criteria: (i)(ii)
Property : 1.54 ha

Buffer zone: 115 ha
Dossier: 162bis
Department of Somme, Picardie Region
N49 53 42 E2 18 6
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2000
Protections
by other conservation instruments

2 protections / 2 elements

2003 Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage (1 element)

Scribing tradition in French timber framing
RAMSAR (1 element)

Marais et tourbières des vallées de la Somme et de l'Avre

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026