World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Vizcaya Bridge
Vizcaya Bridge
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Vizcaya Bridge

Vizcaya Bridge straddles the mouth of the Ibaizabal estuary, west of Bilbao. It was designed by the Basque architect Alberto de Palacio and completed in 1893. The 45-m-high bridge with its span of 160 m, merges 19th-century ironworking traditions with the then new lightweight technology of twisted steel ropes. It was the first bridge in the world to carry people and traffic on a high suspended gondola and was used as a model for many similar bridges in Europe, Africa and the America only a few of which survive. With its innovative use of lightweight twisted steel cables, it is regarded as one of the outstanding architectural iron constructions of the Industrial Revolution.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The Monumental Vizcaya Hanging Bridge is an infrastructure located in the north of the Iberian Peninsula, over the mouth of the River Ibaizabal, at the point where the navigable estuary of Bilbao opens out to the sea. It spans the two banks of the river, thereby connecting the municipalities of Getxo and Portugalete.

It was designed by the Basque architect, Alberto de Palacio, who devised the first bridge in the world with a hanging transporter – which transports passengers and vehicles by means of a gondola suspended high above the passing ships. Its construction is outstanding for merging 19th-century ironworking traditions, taken from the railways, with the new lightweight technology of twisted steel cables, designed by the Frenchman Ferdinand Arnodin. Constructed on private initiative between 1887 and 1893, the bridge has worked almost without interruption since it was built.

The bridge follows the style of the mining aerial tramways and constitutes an outstanding example of architectural minimalism. It is composed of four riveted lattice steel towers, cable-stayed and connected in two pairs, with a total height of 51 metres. Between the two sets of towers, one on either bank, are parabolic cables from which the upper crossbeam hangs, measuring 160 metres in length, suspended 45 metres above sea level at high tide. In order not to interfere with the navigation, a mechanical trolley runs along the crossbeam, from which a platform hangs at the same height as the banks: this is the gondola, capable of transporting around twelve vehicles and some two hundred people. It is known for its aesthetic qualities and constitutes the first bridge in the world to transport passengers using a mechanical, hanging transporter.

The Vizcaya Bridge, one of the most outstanding iron architectural constructions of the European industrial revolution, was hugely innovative due to the fact that it allowed the passage of ships on a wide estuary, with no need for ramps or for raising and lowering of the bridge. This is therefore a system which, at the time it was built, introduced a new solution to meet the requirements at hand and a new method of transport. Furthermore, as regards the materials used, it represents the ironworking methods practiced in the Basque region, starting with exploitation of the local iron ore deposits in Roman times until reaching the peak of its production in the industrial revolution. Its impact at world level was important, given that it was used as a new model for many other transporter bridges of similar characteristics in Europe, Africa and America, very few of which still stand today.

Criterion (i): For being a surprising work that perfectly combines beauty, aesthetics and functionality: the Vizcaya Bridge is a spectacular and aesthetically pleasing addition to the river estuary and an exceptional expression of technical creativity, reflecting a completely satisfactory relationship between form and function.

Criterion (ii): For its innovative nature from the technological point of view and its condition of pioneer in this kind of constructions: the Vizcaya Bridge, by means of developing a hanging transporter mechanism and merging ironmaking technology with the use of new steel cables, created a new form of construction which influenced the design of bridges all over the world in the three subsequent decades, and exported French and Spanish technologies.

Integrity

The Bridge was opened on 28 July 1893 and has operated continuously ever since, except during the Spanish Civil War from 1937 to 1941, a period when the damage suffered caused the platform to fall into the estuary.  

During 1996, 1997 and 1998, the company responsible for its management, El Transbordador de Vizcaya S.L., went about important work to remove different installations added to the Bridge, which were causing it increasing stress and damage. Outstanding among these were the replacement of seriously damaged structural elements and the strengthening of others. Cutting-edge control and protection systems were also introduced, lifts were added to two of the towers and the former tollbooths were demolished to free up space around the original structure, etc.

Today the Bridge is in a very good state of preservation and, as detailed, includes all essential elements of the original structure that define it as a working transporter bridge. The in-depth restoration of the Bridge’s vital elements was implemented due to the need to preserve the original elements; these have saved the Bridge from inevitable technical decline while contributing to the integrity of its structure. The modifications made to the Gondola and power systems serve as an example in the preservation of original functioning structural elements and, therefore, in conserving the integrity of the structure as a working bridge. It should be remembered that today only eight of the more than twenty transporter bridges built in the world are still standing.

Authenticity

Throughout its history, the Vizcaya Bridge has undergone partial updates and modernisations to meet the new necessities as they arose, with no detriment to the essential characteristics that lend it its value. These interventions (replacement of the gondola, introduction of new power systems, installation of new lifts, removal of secondary structures, etc.) have been necessary to keep the bridge in operation and to preserve its authenticity as an operating structure.

Although, in visual terms, the new systems are not the same as the originals, they do offer a technical solution to current requirements, lending greater safety and durability to the structure as a whole. In this respect, the gondola was replaced with a lighter version and the iron wheels on the upper rails holding it in place were replaced with polyurethane rollers to cushion the movements. The Bridge continues to offer a continuous service between the two towns, which have developed new industries related to tourism and the new port.

In 2011, important engineering work was carried out on the Vizcaya Bridge to renew its interior and exterior structure. More than 250 parts were replaced, including guy cables and other parts, in addition to a new running rail, but maintaining and always remaining faithful to the value of their authenticity, and without interrupting its use at any time. Having made an exhaustive analysis of the Bridge structure, it was found that the jet-black colour absorbed excessive radiation, which generated structural fatigue in the steel of the towers and crossbeam. The decision was therefore taken to change the colour to “Vena Roja Hematites Somorrostro”, the most effective for future preservation of the structure.

Protection and management requirements

The Bridge is a cultural monument, approved by Decree 2003 in accordance with Law 7/1990, on Basque Cultural Heritage. Furthermore, both Getxo and Portugalete have Development Plans under which the Bridge environment is protected. The Bridge is the property of the Spanish State which, through its Ministry of Public Works and Transport, delegates its responsibilities to the National Port Authority which, in turn, delegates many decisions to the Bilbao Port Authority. Since 1996, El Transbordador de Vizcaya S.L., a private company, has held the concession to manage the bridge, running until 2025 and giving work to some 30 people.

The Bridge is managed by different bodies with the core objective of developing cultural tourism. With a view to guaranteeing its preservation and authenticity, while also coordinating the different actions and promoting the Bridge and the areas around it, at the moment of the World Heritage declaration, representatives of the Ministry of Culture, of the Basque Government, of the Provincial Office of Bizkaia, of the Municipal Councils of Portugalete and Getxo, and of the Bizkaia Transport Company, jointly drew up a Management Plan. Based on this Plan, an Institutional Panel was constituted to monitor the different works carried out and the holding of events. Similar, a Board of Trustees was appointed to carry out projects related to the objectives of the said Plan, also creating an Advisory Committee for the purposes of studies, analyses and research work. Lastly, a Technical Team puts the plans approved into action and controls the documentation.

Links
 View photos from OUR PLACE the World Heritage collection

The UNESCO Courrier

News  3
World Heritage sites participate in Earth Hour
28 March 2012
UNESCO Courier, Virtual visit to five new World Heritage Sites
20 July 2006
Ancient irrigation system (Oman) and Palaces of Genoa (Italy) among ten new sites on World Heritage List
13 July 2006
Events  1
IX National meeting of World Heritage Managers in Vizcaya Bridge (Getxo), Spain
6 Oct 2015 - 8 Oct 2015
Media
play_arrow Vizcaya Bridge (UNESCO/NHK)
Spain
Date of Inscription: 2006
Criteria: (i)(ii)
Property : 1.08 ha

Buffer zone: 103.88 ha
Dossier: 1217
Basque Country, Province of Bizjaia,
N43 19 23.43 W3 1 0.6
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026