World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Old Towns of Djenné
Old Towns of Djenné
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Assistance
Old Towns of Djenné

Inhabited since 250 B.C., Djenné became a market centre and an important link in the trans-Saharan gold trade. In the 15th and 16th centuries, it was one of the centres for the propagation of Islam. Its traditional houses, of which nearly 2,000 have survived, are built on hillocks (toguere) as protection from the seasonal floods.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Djenné, chief town of the Djenné Circle, located 130 km south-west of Mopti (the regional capital) and roughly 570 km north-east of Bamako (the national capital), is one of the oldest towns of sub-Saharan Africa.

The cultural property “Old Towns of Djenné” is a serial property comprising four archaeological sites, namely Djenné-Djeno, Hambarkétolo, Kaniana and Tonomba, along with the old fabric of the present town of Djenné covering an area of 48.5 ha and divided into ten districts.  The property is an ensemble that over many years has symbolised the typical African city.  It is also particularly representative of Islamic architecture in sub-Saharan Africa.

The property is characterised by the intensive and remarkable use of earth specifically in its architecture. The outstanding mosque of great monumental and religious value is an outstanding example of this. The town is renowned for its civic constructions, with the distinctive style of verticality and buttresses as well as the elegant monumental houses with intricate facades. 

Excavations carried out in 1977, 1981, 1996 and 1997, revealed an extraordinary page of human history dating back to the 3rd century B.C. They have brought to light an archaeological ensemble which bears witness to a pre-Islamic urban structure with a wealth of circular or rectangular constructions in djenné ferey and numerous archaeological remains(funerary jars, pottery, millstones, grinders, metal scoria etc.).

The property « Old Towns of Djenné » comprises the town of Djenné, characterised by a remarkable architecture and its urban fabric, of rare harmony, and four (4) archaeological sites bearing witness to a long-gone pre-Islamic civilization.

The property « Old Towns of Djenné » still retains the values which justified its outstanding universal value at its inscription on the UNESCO World Heritage List. First and foremost, the archaeological, historic, religious and architectural values should be mentioned.

Criterion (iii): Djenné-Djeno, along with Hambarketolo, Tonomba and Kaniana bears exceptional witness to the pre-Islamic civilizations on the inland Delta of the Niger. The discovery of many dwellings on the site of Djenné-Djeno (remains of traditional brick structures (djénné ferey), funerary jars) as well as a wealth of terra cotta artifacts and metal make this a major archaeological site for the study of the evolution of dwellings, industrial and craft techniques.

Criterion (iv): The ancient fabric of Djenné is an outstanding example of an architectural group of buildings illustrating a significant historic period. Influenced by Moroccan architecture (1591), and later marked by the Toucouleur Empire in 1862, the architecture of Djenné is characterized by its verticality, its buttresses punctuating the facades of the two-storey houses whose entrances are always given special attention.  The reconstruction of the Mosque (1906-1907) resulted in the creation of a monument representing local religious architecture.

Integrity

The vestiges of the four inscribed archaeological sites remain intact (pottery shards, funerary jars, remains of walls and circular or rectangular dwellings of traditional round mud bricks (djénné ferey), statuettes and mud bricks, metal scoria, millstones, grinders and Islamic burial grounds).  The marshes where the small islands are located ensure a relative physical integrity. However, these inscribed archaeological sites are vulnerable to very serious threats such as leaching, erosion and gullying by inclement weather and uncontrolled urbanization.

In addition to its prestigious mosque, Djenné still retains its elegant monumental houses of rigorous composition with façades sometimes decorated by a porch, and supporting pilasters with, in the centre, “the potige”, a decorative motif indicating the position of the front door.  This earthen architecture, one of the criteria for inscription of the property on the World Heritage List, has for several decades undergone modifications altering its aesthetic values, for example:

the introduction of modern materials, namely cement, fired bricks and metal doors and windows;
the disappearance of decorative features on the façades, characteristic of the earthen architecture of Djenné.

Authenticity

The authenticity of the site, in particular the inscribed ancient fabric, is testified by the use of little-modified construction materials: earth is the overall privileged material. The transmission of construction techniques is entrusted to the Barey Corporation, stone masons   from generation to generation.

Finally, through spirit, wisdom, welcome and the Great Mosque, Djenné is and remains the “pious town”.

Protection and management requirements

The town of Djenné benefits from legal protection through national heritage listing of the property and the creation of a cultural mission for its conservation.

The Great Mosque, the Koranic schools and the Tombs of the Saints benefit from customary protection through the establishment of a management committee for the Mosque, the association for Koranic schools and supervision by the village chief, its Council and district chiefs.

The site possesses a “conservation and management plan” for a five (5)-year duration, 2008-2012, which has been prepared in cooperation with the communities following a participatory approach.

Possible problems could occur with an increase in the population and building speculation.  The boundaries of the protection zone are vague. An urban regulation which is under preparation could assist in defining the said boundaries and contribute towards sustainable development of the town and respect the heritage values.

The Cultural Mission requires the provision of human and material resources to ensure the control of the property against looting and other threats to the cultural heritage.

Links
 View photos from OUR PLACE the World Heritage collection

Organization of World Heritage Cities

Activities 4
World Heritage Earthen Architecture Programme (WHEAP)
Rivers and Heritage: Niger-Loire, Governance and Culture project. Development of heritage and support for management of land and water resources, Mali
World Heritage Cities Programme
Urban Heritage Atlas: Understanding attributes of historic cities and settlements| Old Towns of Djenné (Mali)
News  14
Workshop on Re-discovering African heritage through the lense of the 2011 Recommendation on the Historic Urban Landscape
4 August 2023
UNESCO, Africa and China agree on projects to safeguard World Heritage in Africa
14 June 2019
Mali’s Old Towns of Djenné on List of World Heritage in Danger
13 July 2016
UNESCO strengthens action to safeguard cultural heritage under attack
12 August 2014
More add
Media
play_arrow NHK World Heritage 100 Series
play_arrow Old Towns of Djenné (UNESCO/NHK)
Mali
Date of Inscription: 1988
Criteria: (iii)(iv)
Dossier: 116rev
Serial: yes

List of World Heritage in Danger

Inscription Year on the List of World Heritage in Danger

2016 - Present
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2025 2024 2023 2021 2019 2018 2017 2016 2015 2014 2013 2012 2010 2008 2007 2006 2005 1998
Protections
by other conservation instruments

1 protection / 1 element

RAMSAR (1 element)

Delta Intérieur du Niger

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026