World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Old City of Zamość
Old City of Zamość
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Old City of Zamość

Zamosc was founded in the 16th century by the chancellor Jan Zamoysky on the trade route linking western and northern Europe with the Black Sea. Modelled on Italian theories of the 'ideal city' and built by the architect Bernando Morando, a native of Padua, Zamosc is a perfect example of a late-16th-century Renaissance town. It has retained its original layout and fortifications and a large number of buildings that combine Italian and central European architectural traditions.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Old City of Zamość in southeastern Poland is an outstanding example of a late 16th-century Central European town designed and built in accordance with Italian Renaissance theories on the creation of “ideal” cities. This innovative approach to town planning was the result of a very close cooperation between the town’s enlightened founder and the distinguished Italian architect Bernardo Morando. The Old City of Zamość today retains its original rectilinear street plan and its unique blend of Italian and Central European architectural traditions, as well as parts of its encircling fortifications.

Located on the trade route linking western and northern Europe with the Black Sea, Zamość was conceived as a trade-based economic centre. From the outset it was intended to be multinational, and had a high level of religious tolerance. It became the tangible reflection of the social and cultural ideas of the Renaissance, which were readily embraced in Poland, as exemplified by the establishment of a university (Zamość Academy) by Jan Zamoyski, the founder and owner of the town. His architect Bernardo Morando’s city plan combined the functions of a residential palace, an urban ensemble, and a fortress, all in accordance with Renaissance concepts.

The Old City of Zamość has two distinct sections: on the west is the Zamoyski palace, and on the east is the town proper, laid out around three squares. The central Great Market Square, located at the junction of the town’s two main axial streets, is enclosed by arcaded merchants’ houses and anchored by a magnificent Town Hall. These and many other notable structures such as the cathedral, arsenal, and fortification gates illustrate a key feature of this great undertaking: a creative enhancement realized through the incorporation of artistic achievements attained in local architecture. The consistent implementation of Morando’s plan over time has resulted in a stylistically homogeneous urban composition with a high level of architectural and landscape values.

Criterion (iv): Zamość is an oustanding example of a Renaissance planned town of the late 16th century, which retains its original layout and fortifications and a large number of buildings of particular interest, blending Italian and Central European architectural traditions.

Integrity

The Old City of Zamość is an integral and complete example of a private Renaissance town established anew, ‘in cruda radice’, based on Italian architectural theory. Within its boundaries are located all the elements necessary to sustain the Outstanding Universal Value of the 75.03 ha property, including its distinctive rectilinear urban layout with its compositional and functional axes, and the network of streets and squares together with buildings illustrating the fusion of Italian and Central European architectural traditions, among them the Town Hall, the founder’s residence, the Zamość Academy, the churches, and the surviving system of fortifications with gates encircling the city. The property does not suffer from adverse effects of development and/or neglect.

Authenticity

Since the modern town of Zamość grew for the most part outside the old fortifications, and having escaped the vast destruction suffered by many other Polish towns during the Second World War, the Old City of Zamość today exhibits a high degree of authenticity, particularly regarding its location and setting, forms and designs, and materials and substances. The property’s authenticity is evidenced in the conservation of its original urban layout filled with building blocks along with all its key buildings: the founder’s residence, the Academy (still serving as an educational institution), the Town Hall, churches and places of worship representing various religions (constituting symbols of tolerance), and the town’s surviving system of fortifications. Minor modifications carried out in the Baroque period did not disrupt the basic structure and composition of the Renaissance town; on the contrary, they enriched it. The greatest changes to the Renaissance-era layout were introduced in the first half of the 19th century, when the town was designated as a strategic state-owned fortress. In spite of some demolitions and reductions in architectural detail, the fundamental internal structure of the town was not affected. The town’s system of fortifications, however, was modernized using the latest military technical solutions of the time, now only partially extant.

Some elements of the urban infrastructure – the ground transport infrastructure and localised utilities – are of particular concern and may be vulnerable unless planning policies and guidance are rigorously and consistently applied.

Protection and management requirements

The Old City of Zamość is subject to the highest level of legal protection, both at the national level through its inclusion in the National Heritage Register and its status as a Monument of History, and at the local level through local spatial development plans. The property – which is located within a contemporary town that serves as a local administrative, economic, religious, and cultural centre – is under the authority of the local government. Issues related to the protection of the historic area come under the authority of a special department operating within the structures of the municipal council and regional bodies of the national monument protection services.

In order to enhance the conservation of the property, a buffer zone (214.91 ha) has been outlined. The principles of heritage protection, along with details concerning the division of the property and its buffer zone into structural units determining both their purpose and the rules for their protection, are recorded in the town planning register.

Links
Zamość

Activities 1
World Heritage Cities Programme
Media
play_arrow Old City of Zamość (UNESCO/NHK)
Poland
Date of Inscription: 1992
Criteria: (iv)
Property : 75.0391 ha

Buffer zone: 214.916 ha
Dossier: 564
City and County of Zamość, Lublin Voivodship (formerly Zamość Voivodship)
N50 43 1 E23 15 10
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026