World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Rock Drawings in Valcamonica
Rock Drawings in Valcamonica
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Rock Drawings in Valcamonica

Valcamonica, situated in the Lombardy plain, has one of the world's greatest collections of prehistoric petroglyphs – more than 140,000 symbols and figures carved in the rock over a period of 8,000 years and depicting themes connected with agriculture, navigation, war and magic.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief Synthesis

Valcamonica, situated in the mountainous area of the Lombardy region, has one of the world's greatest collections of prehistoric petroglyphs – more than 140,000 symbols and figures carved in the rock over a period of more than 8,000 years. Found on both sides of an entire valley, the petroglyphs depict themes connected to agriculture, deer hunting, duels, as well as geometric-symbolic figures.

Criterion (iii): The Rock Drawings of Valcamonica stretch over a period of eight thousand years leading up to our present era, making these human renderings absolutely invaluable.

Criterion (vi): The Rock Drawings of Valcamonica constitute an extraordinary figurative documentation of prehistoric customs and mentality. The systematic interpretation, typological classification, and the chronological study of these configurations in stone represent a considerable contribution to the fields of prehistory, sociology and ethnology.

Integrity

The propertycontains the necessary elements to express its Outstanding Universal Value. The inscribed property includes the most extraordinary engravings, which document and provide the most complete evidence of prehistoric customs and mentality. The general state of conservation of the rock surfaces and the visibility of the rock art images is good.

Inherent aspects of the property are responsible for its vulnerability, for instance due to the exposure of the engravings to atmospheric and climatic factors, the presence of woods and the possible damages caused by pollution or direct human intervention.

Authenticity

The Rock Drawings of Valcamonica, as archaeological remains, have maintained high levels of authenticity in their form, iconography and material. The physical authenticity of the property is preserved thanks to continuous monitoring, restoration and control, ensured by the Soprintendenza per i Beni Archeologici della Lombardia (a local office of the Ministry for Cultural Heritage and Activities) and by a specific network of Parks with rock engravings. All the restoration works are performed under the direction of the Ministry, in accordance with the principles of the Venice Charter.

Protection and management requirements

The property is subject to different legal protections that operate at different levels: national, regional and local.

The national law for the protection and preservation of cultural heritage (Legislative Decree 42/2004) subordinates all the actions on cultural heritage to the preventive approval by the peripheral offices of the Ministry for Cultural Heritage and Activities.

Parks are governed by regional regulations on Parks and Natural Reserves that contain indications concerning the management of areas with archaeological, environmental, botanical and ethnographic importance. These rules are transposed into the municipal planning instruments.

The Soprintendenza per i Beni Archeologici della Lombardia coordinates the actions for the property, the first Italian property inscribed in 1979, and the preparation of the Management Plan. These activities are carried out with the collaboration of the Local Authorities that, because of the vastness of the territory and variety of heritage (more than 180 localities with rock art) have been primarily identified as the Province of Brescia, Comunità Montana di Valle Camonica, Consorzio dei Comuni del Bacino Imbrifero Montano di Valle Camonica (BIM) and the 7 municipalities with Rock Art Parks.

All the relevant public authorities and research institutions present on the territory have been involved in the preparation of the Management Plan. Together, they provided guidance and knowledge, ensured the preservation and enhancement of the property, and started programming and planning the Operation Plan for the sustainable development of the Valley.

To achieve some priority actions of the Management Plan, the Institutional Coordination Group was established in 2006; it is still operative as a controlling instance. Positive developments include the widespread adoption of the Management Plan through resolutions taken by the municipalities, the establishment of new parks (with different institutional profiles: national, regional or municipal) and their involvement the network of the Rock Art Parks.

Since 2007, the Institutional Coordination Group has interacted with the Cultural District of Valle Camonica (promoted by the Bank Cariplo Foundation). This also included improvements to the facilities and enhanced access for visitors.

A monitoring program for the actions was prepared and has been implemented since 2006. In 2011, the different stakeholders involved in the management of the property have signed an agreement towards the integrated management of the cultural services of the property.

Links
Facecook page

Instagram page

Camonica Valley

News  1
‘Managing Rock Art World Heritage Sites’ Workshop Held
31 May 2007
Media
play_arrow Rock Drawings in Valcamonica (UNESCO/NHK)
Italy
Date of Inscription: 1979
Criteria: (iii)(vi)
Property : 432.3 ha

Buffer zone: 1,018.23 ha
Dossier: 94
Serial: yes

Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2009 2007 2005 2004
Protections
by other conservation instruments

1 protection / 1 element

Biosphere Reserves (1 element)

Valle Camonica - Alto Sebino

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026