World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Wood Buffalo National Park
Wood Buffalo National Park
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Wood Buffalo National Park

Situated on the plains in the north-central region of Canada, the park (which covers 44,807 km2) is home to North America's largest population of wild bison. It is also the natural nesting place of the whooping crane. Another of the park's attractions is the world's largest inland delta, located at the mouth of the Peace and Athabasca rivers.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Wood Buffalo National Park is an outstanding example of ongoing ecological and biological processes encompassing some of the largest undisturbed grass and sedge meadows left in North America. It sustains the world’s largest herd of wood bison, a threatened species. The park’s huge tracts of boreal forest also provide crucial habitat for a diverse range of other species, including the endangered whooping crane. The continued evolution of a large inland delta, salt plains and gypsum karst add to the park’s uniqueness.

Criterion (vii): The great concentrations of migratory wildlife are of world importance and the rare and superlative natural phenomena include a large inland delta, salt plains and gypsum karst that are equally internationally significant.

Criterion (ix): Wood Buffalo National Park is the most ecologically complete and largest example of the entire Great Plains-Boreal grassland ecosystem of North America, the only place where the predator-prey relationship between wolves and wood bison has continued, unbroken, over time.

Criterion (x): Wood Buffalo National Park contains the only breeding habitat in the world for the whooping crane, an endangered species brought back from the brink of extinction through careful management of the small number of breeding pairs in the park. The park’s size (4.5 million ha), complete ecosystems and protection are essential for in-situ conservation of the whooping crane.

Integrity

Wood Buffalo National Park straddles the boundary between the province of Alberta and the Northwest Territories, and encompasses 4.5 million hectares of forest, wetland and prairie, including the majority of the Peace-Athabasca Delta. The size of the park allows for the protection of entire ecosystems and the ecosystem features that are the basis for the park’s Outstanding Universal Value. The park’s size, remoteness, very low human population density and the absence of resource extraction activities minimize human-related stress within the property, resulting in a high level of integrity. Bovine brucellosis and tuberculosis are present within the wood bison population in and around the park. The actual and potential impact on the delta from stressors originating outside the park, such as flow regulation, water withdrawals, industrial discharge and climate change, is monitored by the park and by working in collaboration with a network of partners to monitor and manage impacts from upstream development.

Protection and management requirements

The Canada National Parks Act provides effective legal protection for the park. Under the requirements of the legislation, a park management plan was approved in June 2010 and provides direction for protecting the features of the park that are the basis for its Outstanding Universal Value, and for providing opportunities for visitors to experience and learn about the park. The park’s two largest wetlands (the Peace-Athabasca Delta and the whooping crane nesting area) have also been declared Wetlands of International Importance under the RAMSAR convention.

Park managers work with 11 Aboriginal groups for whom Wood Buffalo National Park is an area of significant cultural value to cooperatively manage the park, as each group carries out traditional harvesting and other cultural activities within the park boundaries. Endangered species and their critical habitat, including the breeding grounds of the whooping crane, are protected under provisions of Canada’s Species at Risk Act. Park staff also work with Environment Canada, international crane preservation groups and U.S. government agencies to ensure the long term viability of the park’s whooping crane flock.

Park staff closely monitors upstream development on the major rivers that flow into the park and work closely with local Aboriginal partners, other government agencies, stakeholders and industry to maintain the ecological integrity of Wood Buffalo National Park. The park management plan commits park managers to developing an Area Management Plan for the Peace-Athabasca Delta to address the challenges of managing the delta’s ecological and cultural values in cooperation with partners and stakeholders. The Peace-Athabasca Delta Ecological Monitoring Program, a multi-stakeholder group made up of Aboriginal representatives, government and non-government organizations, is a cornerstone in developing and implementing this plan.

Special attention will be given over the long term to monitoring and taking appropriate actions related to a number of factors in or near the property. Specifically, attention will focus on the actual and potential impacts of upstream development and climate change.

Links
Facebook page

Wood Buffalo National Park

Protectedplanet.net

Activities 1
Case Study: Assessment of cumulative impacts of multiple developments near a World Heritage property
News  3
Unprecedented fires fueled by climate change threaten iconic World Heritage forests
24 June 2025
Reactive Monitoring Mission to take place at Wood Buffalo National Park World Heritage property (Canada)
16 September 2016
World Migratory Bird Day 2011 observed 14-15 May in over 50 countries
13 May 2011
Canada
Date of Inscription: 1983
Criteria: (vii)(ix)(x)
Property : 4,480,000 ha

Dossier: 256
Northwest Territories and Alberta
N59 21 30 W112 17 36
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2025 2023 2021 2019 2017 2015 2004 2003 2002 1992 1991 1990 1989 1985
Protections
by other conservation instruments

1 protection / 2 elements

RAMSAR (2 elements)

Peace-Athabasca Delta
Whooping Crane Summer Range

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026