World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Qutb Minar and its Monuments, Delhi
Qutb Minar and its Monuments, Delhi
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Qutb Minar and its Monuments, Delhi

Built in the early 13th century a few kilometres south of Delhi, the red sandstone tower of Qutb Minar is 72.5 m high, tapering from 2.75 m in diameter at its peak to 14.32 m at its base, and alternating angular and rounded flutings. The surrounding archaeological area contains funerary buildings, notably the magnificent Alai-Darwaza Gate, the masterpiece of Indo-Muslim art (built in 1311), and two mosques, including the Quwwatu'l-Islam, the oldest in northern India, built of materials reused from some 20 Brahman temples.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
Hindi
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The ensemble of mosques, minars, and other structures in the Qutb Minar complex is an outstanding testimony to the architectural and artistic achievements of Islamic rulers after they first established their power in the Indian subcontinent in the 12th century. The complex, located at the southern fringe of New Delhi, illustrates the new rulers’ aspiration to transform India from Dar-al-Harb to Dar-al-Islam with the introduction of distinctive building types and forms.

Referred to as the Qutb mosque, the Quwwatu’l-Islam, meaning the Might of Islam, introduced to India the classic model of Islamic architecture that had developed in western Asia. The mosque constituted a large rectangular courtyard enclosed by arcades having carved pillars on three sides and an imposing five-arched screen marking the west. Incorporating temple elements such as the carved pillars and cladding characteristic of Hindu and Jain temples, it was completed by subsequent rulers – Qutb ud din Aibak and Shamsu’d-Din Iltutmish. Drawing references from their Ghurid homeland, they constructed a minar (minaret) at the south-eastern corner of the Quwwatu’l-Islam between 1199 and 1503, thereby completing the vocabulary of a typical classic Islamic mosque. Built of red and buff sandstone and eloquently carved with inscriptional bands, the Qutb Minar is the tallest masonry tower in India, measuring 72.5 metres high, with projecting balconies for calling all Muadhdhin to prayer. An iron pillar in the courtyard gave the mosque a unique Indian aesthetic.

The 13th-century square tomb of Iltutmish in the north-western part of Quwwatu’l-Islam marks the beginning of the tradition of constructing royal tombs, a practice followed as late as the Mughal era in India. The tomb-chamber is profusely carved with inscriptions and geometrical and arabesque patterns associated with Saracenic tradition. Expansions made by Allaudin Khilji to the existing ensemble between 1296 and 1311 reflect the power wielded by the monarch. In his short reign, the emperor added a massive ceremonial gateway (Alai Darwaza) south of the Qutb Minar, and also added a madarsa (place of learning). The first storey of the incomplete Alai Minar, which was envisaged to be twice the scale of the Qutb Minar, stands 25 metres high.

Criterion (iv): The religious and funerary buildings in the Qutb Minar complex represent an outstanding example of the architectural and artistic achievements of early Islamic India.

Integrity

The boundary enveloping the remains of the Qutb and Alai minars, Quwwatu’l-Islam mosque with its extension, madarsa of Alauddin Khilji, tomb of Iltutmish, Alai Darwaza (ceremonial gateway), Iron Pillar, and other structures is of adequate size to ensure the complete representation of the features and processes that convey the property’s significance, including the aspiration and vision of the Ghurid clans to establish their rule and religion in India. The state of conservation is stable and the property does not suffer from adverse effects of development and/or neglect.

The peripheral area of the property has mixed land use, a large tract of green area (Mehrauli Archaeological Park), and facilities to support visitor movement. No threats to the integrity of the property have been identified by the State Party.

Authenticity

The Qutb Minar and its Monuments complex is substantially authentic in terms of its location, forms and designs, and materials and substance. The attributes that sustain the Outstanding Universal Value of the property are truthfully and credibly expressed, and fully convey the value of the property. To maintain the state of conservation of the property, repairs undertaken have respected the original construction, architectural, and ornamentation systems that demonstrate the Outstanding Universal Value of the property. Works periodically undertaken to ensure the property’s structural and material sustainability are reversible.

Protection and management requirements

The Qutb Minar and its Monuments complex is owned by the Government of India and managed by the Archaeological Survey of India (ASI). Its peripheral area is managed by multiple stakeholders, including the ASI, Delhi Development Authority, Municipal Corporation of Delhi, and Government of the National Capital Territory of Delhi. The overall administration of the property and its peripheral area is governed by the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act (1958) and its Rules (1959), Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains (Amendment and Validation) Act (2010), Delhi Municipal Corporation Act (1957), Land Acquisition Act (1894), Delhi Urban Art Commission Act (1973), Urban Land (Sealing and Regulation) Act (1976), Environmental Pollution Control Act (1986), Indian Forest Act (1927), Forest Conservation Act (1980), and Delhi Development Act (1957). Annual funds are provided by the Central Government for the overall conservation, maintenance, and management of the property.

The Qutb Minar and its Monuments complex is maintained, monitored, and managed by the ASI Acts and Rules through an annual conservation and development plan. To strengthen the plan, training, researchers, and experts are engaged to ensure high-quality conservation that respects the authenticity of the property. Although there is a proposal to prepare a management plan for the property that includes conservation, integrated development, visitor management, and interpretation, in the meantime the property is protected under a well-established management system.

Links
 View photos from OUR PLACE the World Heritage collection

Qutab Minar Complex (Delhigate.com)

Events  1
Final Itinerant Workshop on the Conservation and Management of Persian, Timurid and Mogul Architecture
6 Apr 2009 - 12 Apr 2009
Media
play_arrow Qutb Minar and its Monuments, Delhi (UNESCO/NHK)
India
Date of Inscription: 1993
Criteria: (iv)
Dossier: 233
Delhi
N28 31 32.988 E77 11 7.008
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026