World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
L'viv – the Ensemble of the Historic Centre
L'viv – the Ensemble of the Historic Centre
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
L'viv – the Ensemble of the Historic Centre

The city of L''viv, founded in the late Middle Ages, was a flourishing administrative, religious and commercial centre for several centuries. The medieval urban topography has been preserved virtually intact (in particular, there is evidence of the different ethnic communities who lived there), along with many fine Baroque and later buildings.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The city of L’viv was founded in the late Middle Ages where a settlement had existed since the 5th and 6th centuries. It flourished as an administrative, religious and commercial centre due to its favourable geographical position for trade and political development. Today, the surviving architectural and artistic heritage reflects a synthesis of Eastern European traditions influenced by those from Italy and Germany. The property, “L'viv – the Ensemble of the Historic Centre”, consists of two components: the primary area, encompassing the castle, its surrounding area and the city centre, and to the southwest, a smaller area on St. Yuri’s Hill for the ensemble of St. Yuri’s Cathedral.

L’viv’s historic centre includes many distinct parts representing different stages in its development. The Vysokyi Zamok (High Castle) and Pidzamche (area around the castle) are the main and oldest part of the town, dating to the 5th century. It retains its original topography with a hill, on which the castle sits, and lowlands on which a system of streets and squares developed between the 13th and 17th centuries. Evidence of occupation by separate ethnic communities is seen in the surviving buildings, including a mosque, a synagogue and a variety of religious buildings from the Orthodox, Armenian and Catholic churches.

The Seredmistia, or city centre, developed in the 14th century and features well-preserved Eastern European urban buildings, including many monasteries and residences of the Renaissance and Baroque traditions, as well as parks built on the original site of the medieval fortifications and more recent buildings dating from the last two centuries.

Located on a mountain plateau to the southwest of the medieval city is the Ensemble of St. Yuri. This complex was the heart of Halychyna Church Metropolis and features buildings primarily in Baroque-style with a high artistic value.

Criterion ii: In its urban fabric and its architecture, L’viv is an outstanding example of the fusion of the architectural and artistic traditions of Eastern Europe with those of Italy and Germany.

Criterion v: The political and commercial role of L’viv attracted to it a number of ethnic groups with different cultural and religious traditions, who established separate yet interdependent communities within the city, evidence of which is still visible in the modern townscape.

Integrity

The two component parts that form the ensemble of the historic centre of L’viv contain all the elements necessary to reflect its Outstanding Universal Value. The surviving buildings and ancient street pattern are able to illustrate the history of L’viv with its diverse ethnic and religious influences.

Threats to the property’s integrity have been identified, including excessive heavy vehicular traffic, the exodus of residents to the suburbs and inappropriate development. The latter is caused by a number of factors including inadequate funding, lack of education for owners and users of the architectural monuments, as well as deficiencies in the implementation of existing regulations.

Authenticity

The authenticity of the property is high. Its setting retains its characteristic topography with hills, plateaus and river valleys. This landscape continues to illustrate the traditional relationship between the defensive castle constructed on a hill and the town below. Moreover, the urban layout survives in the medieval street pattern, squares, major churches and ethnic communities. The parcel system of the historical city centre has been preserved despite numerous fires (in 1527 and 1571).

Authenticity of design is also found in the preservation of many early residences. This is visible in their interior layout, original materials in interior decoration, wall paintings, stained glass windows and exterior ornamentation. This is also seen in the exterior bricks and large-sized stone blocks used in construction.

Some loss of urban structure has occurred over time, mainly during the Second World War. However, the individual addition of later buildings (Ukrainian secession and modernism) has blended organically into the pre-existing ensemble.

Protection and management requirements

The area covered by the territory of L'viv – the Ensemble of the Historic Centre is included within the larger 3,000 hectare region that was designated as a National Historical and Architectural ·Preserve on 12 June 1975 by Resolution NQ 297 of the UkrSSR Council of Ministers under the provisions of the Law on Monuments of History and Culture (1970). The Law of Ukraine “On Protection of Cultural Heritage” (2000) is the main legislative document at the national level on which the property protection is based. The Council of Ministers has designated 209 historic monuments as National Landmarks within the inscribed territory and a number of others are declared as being of local importance by resolution of the Regional Administration. This legislation imposes strict control on any activities proposed within the protected area that may have an adverse impact on the Outstanding Universal Value.

Building ownership belongs to a variety of state, municipal and private parties. Overall supervision is the responsibility of the Department of Cultural Heritage and Cultural Monuments of the Ministry of Culture of Ukraine. At the local level, management is delegated to the Directorate of the L’viv City Council for the Protection of the Historic Environment. Advice relating to construction and restoration projects is provided by the Scientific Advisory Board, which is associated with the department and is composed of professionals in cultural heritage restoration as well as representatives of relevant community organizations (the charitable foundation Preservation of Historical and Architectural Heritage of L’viv and the Union of Architects). Recent construction activities within the property and its buffer zone that may affect the Outstanding Universal Value have been halted.

Management and property protection are carried out according to the Strategic Development Plan for the City of L’viv (2011-2025), part of an Integrated Concept of the Development of the Central Part of L’viv (2011-2020). This document identifies protective zoning for the historic area. A management plan for the World Heritage property is under development.

On the local level, each year a plan of restoration of monuments is approved, with particular attention to the public welfare of the territories and the reconstruction of engineering networks for the structures. Various programmes are offered at the municipal level. For instance, funding is provided for restoration of historic doors and windows. Additionally the joint Ukrainian-German project assists with training seminars to improve the skills of local craftsmen. Concern about heavy traffic within the historic centre is being addressed by restricting vehicles in certain areas and rerouting buses. Cycling infrastructure is also under development.

Links
Department of Historic Environment Protection (in Ukrainian only)

LKP Heritage Bureau in Lviv (in Ukrainian only)

Department of Historic Environment Protection Facebook page (in Ukrainian only)

Heritage Bureau in Lviv Facebook page (in Ukrainian only)

Heritage Bureau in Lviv Instagram account (in Ukrainian only)

Lviv City Council

Lviv City Council (in Ukrainian)

All About L'viv

Activities 1
World Heritage Cities Programme
News  8
UNESCO alarmed by strikes on Lviv World Heritage Site
25 March 2026
Ukraine: UNESCO sites of Kyiv and L’viv are inscribed on the List of World Heritage in Danger
15 September 2023
UNESCO trains managers of World Heritage sites in Ukraine in disaster risk reduction
11 August 2023
L’viv: UNESCO condemns the attack in the buffer zone of the World Heritage site
6 July 2023
More add
Ukraine
Date of Inscription: 1998
Minor boundary modification inscribed year: 2008
Criteria: (ii)(v)
Property : 120 ha

Buffer zone: 2,441 ha
Dossier: 865bis
Serial: yes

List of World Heritage in Danger

Inscription Year on the List of World Heritage in Danger

2023 - Present
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2025 2024 2023 2015 2013 2011 2010 2009 2007 2005 2004
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026