World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Boyana Church
Boyana Church
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Assistance
Best Practice
Boyana Church

Located on the outskirts of Sofia, Boyana Church consists of three buildings. The eastern church was built in the 10th century, then enlarged at the beginning of the 13th century by Sebastocrator Kaloyan, who ordered a second two storey building to be erected next to it. The frescoes in this second church, painted in 1259, make it one of the most important collections of medieval paintings. The ensemble is completed by a third church, built at the beginning of the 19th century. This site is one of the most complete and perfectly preserved monuments of east European medieval art.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

There are several layers of wall paintings in the interior from the 11th, 13th, 15-17th and 19th centuries which testify to the high level of wall painting during the different periods. The paintings with the most outstanding artistic value are those from 13th century. Whilst they interpret the Byzantine canon, the images have a special spiritual expressiveness and vitality and are painted in harmonious proportions.

Criterion (ii): From an architectural point of view, Boyana Church is a pure example of a church with a Greek cross ground-plan with dome, richly decorated facades and decoration of ceramic elements. It is one of the most remarkable medieval monuments with especially fine wall paintings.

Criterion (iii): The Boyana Church is composed of three parts, each built at a different period - 10 century, 13th century and 19th century which constitute a homogenous whole.

Integrity

The integrity of Boyana church is fully assured. In 1917 a park was created around the church, thereby securing its immediate surroundings through being separated from the impact of modern traffic. The property has also remained intact from historic invasions, and other destructive threats. Three separate zones are defined in the property boundaries and buffer zone, through which appropriate control measures are applied.

Authenticity

The concept, form and development of the three constructional phases of the property, from the 10th-11th; 13th; and 19th centuries, are clearly evident. Necessary conservation and restoration works have been completed. Where sufficient evidence existed, later façade renders have been removed to reveal the original appearance of walls.

To safeguard and present the internal 11th and 12th centuries fresco fragments, those from the 13th century, and the later 1882 additions in the antechamber, they were cleaned, refilled and conserved. This work was completed in 2008. The property is now air-conditioned, and under constant surveillance.

Protection and management requirements

The management is implemented by virtue of:

Cultural Heritage Law (Official Gazette No 19 of 2009) and subdelegated legislation. This law regulates the research, studying, protection and promotion of the immovable cultural heritage in Bulgaria, and the development of Conservation and Management plans for its inscribed World Heritage List of immovable cultural properties.
Instructions on the Protection and Preservation of the World Monument "Boyana Church" and its Protective Zone were adopted by Official Cover Letter No.RD-91-00-17, signed by the Chairman of the Culture Committee, and dated 10.08.1989. These Instructions are mandatory and set out the responsibilities of the interested parties, including the state, local institutions and owners. 
Links
Boyana Church

Media
play_arrow Boyana Church (UNESCO/NHK)
Bulgaria
Date of Inscription: 1979
Minor boundary modification inscribed year: 2025
Criteria: (ii)(iii)
Property : 0.68 ha

Buffer zone: 13.55 ha
Dossier: 42bis
Boyana district, Sofia
N42 38 40.81 E23 15 58.28
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

1994
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026