World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Würzburg Residence with the Court Gardens and ...
Würzburg Residence with the Court Gardens and Residence Square
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Würzburg Residence with the Court Gardens and Residence Square

This magnificent Baroque palace – one of the largest and most beautiful in Germany and surrounded by wonderful gardens – was created under the patronage of the prince-bishops Lothar Franz and Friedrich Carl von Schönborn. It was built and decorated in the 18th century by an international team of architects, painters (including Tiepolo), sculptors and stucco-workers, led by Balthasar Neumann.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Located in Southern Germany, the sumptuous Würzburg Residence was built and decorated in the 18th century by an international corps of architects, painters, sculptors, and stucco workers under the patronage of two successive Prince-Bishops, Johann Philipp Franz and Friedrich Karl von Schönborn.

The Residence was essentially constructed between 1720 and 1744, decorated on the interior from 1740 to 1770 and landscaped with magnificent gardens from 1765 to 1780. It testifies to the ostentation of the two Prince-Bishops, and as such illustrates the historical situation of one of the most brilliant courts of Europe during the 18th century. The most renowned architects of the period - the Viennese, Lukas von Hildebrandt, and the Parisians Robert de Cotte and Germain Boffrand - drew up the plans. They were supervised by the official architect of the Prince Bishop, Balthasar Neumann, who was assisted by Maximilian von Welsch, the architect of the Elector of Mainz. Sculptors and stucco-workers came from Italy, Flanders, and Munich. The Venetian painter Giovanni Battista Tiepolo frescoed the staircase and the walls of the Imperial Hall.

The residence gives consummate testimony to the imposing courtly and cultural life of the feudalistic era of the 18th century, but at the same time its varied use today is an example of modern utilisation and preservation as a monument of ahistorical structure.

Criterion (i): The Würzburg Residence is at once the most homogeneous and extraordinary of the Baroque palaces. It is an autonomous work of art in European Baroque style illustrated by its structure and décor elements. The Residence represents a unique artistic realisation as a result of its ambitious programme, the originality of creative spirit, and the international character of its workshop. Perhaps no monument from the same period is able to claim such a concurrence of talent.

Criterion (iv): The Residence is a document of European culture. The structure is a joint achievement of the most significant European architects, sculptors, and painters of the 18th century from France (particularly Paris), Italy (particularly Venice), Austria (particularly Vienna), and Germany.

Integrity

Though heavily affected by an aerial bombing on the 16 March 1945, the Residence of Würzburg has undergone careful and exemplary restorations since 1945. The property, therefore, contains all elements necessary for Outstanding Universal Value. There are no urgent, adverse effects of development and/or neglect.

Authenticity

The authenticity of Würzburg Residence with the Court Gardens and Residence Square is truthfully and credibly expressed through the main attributes of the property.

Protection and management requirements

The laws and regulations of the Federal Republic of Germany and the Free State of Bavaria guarantee the consistent protection of the Würzburg Residence and its surroundings: The Würzburg Residence together with the Court Gardens and Residence Square is officially listed as a historic monument and lies within the monument ensemble “Old City of Würzburg”. Furthermore, the Ring Park, located to the east behind the Court Gardens, is also protected as an individual monument. Therefore, alterations to the Residence, its immediate surroundings, or in the Old City ensemble are subject to existing legal regulations, such as the requirement for conservation-sensitive authorisation, or integration into the historic building fabric. The management authority is the Bavarian Palaces Department. The implementation of the Management Plan is guaranteed by a steering group including members of the Bavarian Palace Department; the Bavarian State Ministry of Sciences, Research, and the Arts; the Bavarian State Office for Preservation of Monuments and Historic Buildings, the City of Würzburg, and ICOMOS Germany.

The World Heritage site and its buffer zone are defined in such a way to ensure the lasting protection and sustained preservation of the visual and built integrity of the Würzburg Residence and its immediate surroundings.

Furthermore, all important visual connections and street axes from and to the Residence warrant protection. The Free State of Bavaria and the City of Würzburg commit themselves to guaranteeing the comprehensive and permanent protection of the World Heritage property, "Würzburg Residence with the Court Gardens and Residence Square". They acknowledge a shared responsibility for the material and immaterial heritage they have been entrusted with. The Bavarian Palaces Department is co-ordinating all structural, restoration, and conservation issues relating to the World Heritage properties. Based on research, experience, and consultations the impact of visitation and events has been regulated by the Bavarian Department of Palaces. Moreover, detailed provisions of the visitor’ and event management, among others, are laid out in the Management Plan. Of special interest are the chapters on “Potential risks and conservation measures”, and on “Restoration and conservation measures” of the Management Plan.

Links
Würzburg Residenz

Würzburger Residenz (Deutsche UNESCO-Kommission)

Activities 1
World Heritage Cities Programme
Media
play_arrow Würzburg Residence with the Court Gardens and Residence ... (UNESCO/NHK)
Germany
Date of Inscription: 1981
Minor boundary modification inscribed year: 2010
Criteria: (i)(iv)
Property : 14.77 ha

Buffer zone: 25.0685 ha
Dossier: 169bis
Serial: yes

Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026