World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Episcopal Complex of the Euphrasian Basilica ...
Episcopal Complex of the Euphrasian Basilica in the Historic Centre of Poreč
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Episcopal Complex of the Euphrasian Basilica in the Historic Centre of Poreč

The group of religious monuments in Porec, where Christianity was established as early as the 4th century, constitutes the most complete surviving complex of its type. The basilica, atrium, baptistery and episcopal palace are outstanding examples of religious architecture, while the basilica itself combines classical and Byzantine elements in an exceptional manner.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The Episcopal Complex of the Euphrasian Basilica in the Historic Centre of Poreč is an outstanding example of an early Christian episcopal ensemble that is exceptional by virtue of its completeness and its unique basilican cathedral and that is a representative of a stylistically important episcopal palace. It is, furthermore, a structural ensemble and, when taken with the archaeological remains of several earlier building phases, it forms part of a greater unit, namely, the historic town of Poreč. As such it provides the unifying factor for cultural, urban, and architectural history beyond the cathedral complex, and developed into the late classical and early medieval town when the Episcopal Complex of the Euphrasian Basilica was established.

The present church was built in the mid-6th century by Bishop Euphrasius on the north coast of the peninsula where the town developed. The latest series of churches on the site incorporate parts of its predecessor. Euphrasius also built an atrium beyond the narthex of the basilica, a baptistery at the end of the atrium, a monumental episcopal palace between the atrium and the sea, and a small memorial chapel north-east of the basilica. The Kanonika (Canon’s House) was added in 1257, followed by the belltower in the 16th century, and by smaller buildings such as the 15th century sacristy and chapels of the 17th and 19th centuries.

Euphrasius’ basilica is three aisled with a large central apse flanked by two smaller ones. Its plain columns have carved capitals, linked by arcading. In the main apse there are mosaics around the four windows, in the semi-dome and on the front wall. There are remains of other decoration of various dates in the church. The memorial chapel is of a trefoil-shaped plan, the apses being round inside and polygonal outside. The baptistery and atrium conserved the original form. Some remains of the earlier churches discovered in archaeological excavations are on display. Only small traces of the 6th-century bishop’s palace survived.

Criterion (ii): The episcopal Complex of the Euphrasian Basilica is an outstanding example of an early Christian ensemble reflecting the development of Christian ecclesiastical architecture and planning within the late Roman and Byzantine Empire.

Criterion (iii): The Episcopal Complex of the Euphrasian Basilica in the Historic Centre of Poreč is an outstanding example of an early Christian episcopal ensemble that is exceptional by virtue of its completeness and its unique Basilican cathedral.

Criterion (iv): The Episcopal Complex of the Euphrasian Basilica is the most complete surviving complex of this type. The basilica, atrium, baptistery, and episcopal palace are outstanding examples of religious architecture, whilst the basilica itself combines classical and Byzantine elements in an exceptional manner.

Integrity

The Complex of the Euphrasian Basilica in the Historic Centre of Poreč is the best preserved early Christian cathedral complex with all the parts of the original structure so integrally preserved: the church, memorial chapel, atrium, baptistery and particularly the bishop’s residence are outstanding in their level of preservation. All these structures are included within the inscribed property. All these buildings have almost entirely preserved their original structures. The exceptional quality of the complex lies in the completeness and compactness of the group and its intimate relationship with its historic town.

There are risks of natural disaster and the property may suffer from development pressures or tourism pressure. Relative humidity as a result of the sea level rise caused by climate change is currently the main issue.

Authenticity

The authenticity of the Euphrasian episcopal complex is an exemplary illustration of historical multistratification, in the spirit of the 1964 Venice Charter. Restoration work has been carried out here from the Middle Ages up to the present day, according to the perceptions and philosophies of the succeeding periods. The results of this continuous activity have become intrinsic parts of the monument itself and bestow a special value on it as witnesses to historical change.

Protection and management requirements

The Euphrasian Basilica is a cultural property designated according to the 1999 Cultural Monuments Protection Act. As a result, any intervention requires authorization by the competent local conservation department. The complex is owned by the Poreč and Pula Episcopal Ordinariate. It retains its function as the cathedral of the Poreč and Pula Diocese, although the residence of the bishop moved from the Bishop's Palace in 1992 which is now, together with the archaeological area, in use as a museum. The management plan provides for the church, sacristy, atrium, and baptistery to retain their active ecclesiastical functions.

The Croatian Restoration Institute manages restoration works on the property according to priorities set by the condition of the structure and the finances provided by the Ministry of Culture and Media.

The general state of conservation is good. In regards to long term management, sea level rise caused by climate change is the main issue to address to prevent moisture related deterioration of the structures.

Links
Croatia Tourist Info

The City of Porec

History of Porec and The Episcopal Complex of the Euphrasian Basilica, (City of Porec)

Activities 2
World Heritage Cities Programme
World Heritage Youth Forum (2011) First South East Europe (SEE)
News  1
World Heritage Committee Inscribes 46 New Sites on World Heritage List
7 December 1997
Media
play_arrow Episcopal Complex of the Euphrasian Basilica in the ... (UNESCO/NHK)
Croatia
Date of Inscription: 1997
Criteria: (ii)(iii)(iv)
Property : 1.1 ha

Dossier: 809
County of Istria
N45 13 42.9 E13 35 36
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026