World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
The Historic Town and Archaeological Site of ...
The Historic Town and Archaeological Site of Gedi
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
The Historic Town and Archaeological Site of Gedi

Surrounded by a remnant coastal forest, away from the coastline, the abandoned city of Gedi was one of the most important Swahili cities on the East African coast from the 10th to 17th centuries. During this period, it was part of a complex and international network of trade and cultural exchanges that crossed the Indian Ocean, linking African coastal centres with Persia and other areas. The opulent settlement is clearly delineated by walls and features remains of domestic, religious, and civic architecture, and a sophisticated water management system. It strongly represents the characteristics of Swahili architecture and town planning, utilising materials such as coral rag, coral and earth mortar and wood.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The Historic Town and Archaeological Site of Gedi was one of the most important and densely populated Swahili cities on the East African coast in the period from the 10th to 17th centuries (and particularly between the 15th and 17th centuries). During this period, Gedi was part of a complex network of trade and cultural exchanges that crossed the Indian Ocean, linking African coastal and inland centres with ports around the Arabian Sea and Southern Asia. Because Gedi was abandoned, its surviving ruins strongly demonstrates the characteristics of Swahili architecture and town planning.

Gedi was an opulent settlement, defined by two rings of irregularly running walls, public and private buildings, street patterns, tombs, and an elaborate palace complex and Grand Mosque. Within the inner walls, the remains of domestic, civic and religious architecture, all constructed from local coral stone and lime mortar, are laid out around a grid street pattern, with the mosques and tombs embellished by carvings and inset with Chinese porcelain. Between the inner and outer walls, there is evidence of more modest houses built for the majority of the residents. The city was serviced by wells and a sophisticated water engineering and management system that is still readable.

Luxury goods imported from China, Persia, India, and Venice found at Gedi demonstrate its role in international trade networks, that were supported by the export of gold, ivory, and other minerals and timber, as well as slaves. Gedi is located inland, 6.5 kilometres away from the Indian Ocean coastline and is surrounded by a remnant coastal forest. Gedi is well-researched, and has the potential to contribute further to the understanding of Swahili coastal settlements and trading histories.

Criterion (ii): The Historic Town and Archaeological Site of Gedi exhibits an important interchange of values on architecture, technology and town-planning as a result of its participation over several centuries in the Indian Ocean trading system between the East African coast, the Arabian Sea and Southern Asia. The fusion of African and Islamic beliefs can be seen in the layout of the city, in the distinctive architectural forms of its coral stone buildings, in the decorative details of its mosques and tombs, and in the technical know-how of the wells and hydraulic systems that sustained a large urban settlement over centuries of occupation.

Criterion (iii): The Historic Town and Archaeological Site of Gedi bears exceptional testimony to the strong Swahili cultural traditions that developed and flourished as a result of maritime trade between the East African coast and the Indian Ocean from the 10th to the 17th centuries. Gedi was a substantial urban settlement with outstanding features of town planning, architecture, and infrastructure. It is distinctive for the scale and density of its urban settlement, unusual and complex spatial layout, and intricate water engineering.

Criterion (iv): The Historic Town and Archaeological Site of Gedi is an outstanding example of a Swahili settlement from the 10th to the 17th centuries, that reflects a period when the East African coast became part of a global trading network linking Eastern Africa across the Arabian Sea and the Indian Ocean with India and Southern Asia. Gedi is one of the largest, most well-preserved and well-researched abandoned Swahili Islamic settlements on the East African coast. The architectural and archaeological elements of Gedi demonstrate its opulence, as well as its social stratification.

Integrity

The boundaries of the property are well-defined and contain all the attributes of the historical town including the inner and outer walls, water infrastructure and wells, tombs, mosques, sunken courts, palace, private houses, streets, and alleyways. The attributes are well-documented and the structures and archaeological materials are generally in a good state of conservation, although they are vulnerable and require monitoring and maintenance. Traditional building materials and methods were used for the maintenance of the structures. The visual integrity of the site is also good, due to the protection provided by the surrounding remnant African coastal forest in the buffer zone which is managed with the support of the Kenya Forest Service.

Authenticity

Gedi is an abandoned settlement with standing walls and buried archaeological remains. The abandonment of the settlement and lack of subsequent occupation has ensured a high level of authenticity. The remains of buildings and walls are in their original location, and the town layout is evident. The water sumps and other infrastructure elements are in place. The original building materials have been respected in the conservation works undertaken, and all works are documented. Appropriate conservation measures are in place and a detailed Conservation Management Plan for Gedi is in preparation that should further support the authenticity of the property.

Protection and management requirements

The property has been subject to legal protection since 1927 and is a National Monument protected by the Kenyan National Museums and Heritage Act (2006). The natural values of the surrounding forest are also protected by Kenyan law. At the local level, Gedi is additionally protected through the County Integrated Development Planning processes, and the Spatial Development Framework. All developments within the property and the buffer zone require permission from the National Museums of Kenya and are subject to Heritage Impact Assessment processes.

Gedi is managed by the National Museums of Kenya in cooperation with the Malindi Museum, relevant national and local authorities, and the local community. A management plan (2022-2027) and action plan are in place, and were prepared in cooperation with major stakeholders and the local community. Gedi is vulnerable to fire, and fire management and training are priorities for the disaster risk preparedness plan which is being prepared. Further development of strategies and plans for visitor management, sustainable tourism, archaeological research, interpretation and conservation are planned. The management plan includes actions for capacity building and the transfer of traditional skills. Adequate monitoring is in place, although this should be further augmented by regular monitoring of vegetation, and the development of more specific indicators that can track trends and identify emerging issues.

Activities 1
Culture|2030 Indicators National Profile of Kenya
News  2
A major step forward in the protection of African World Heritage
7 August 2024
UNESCO World Heritage: 24 new sites inscribed
1 August 2024
Kenya
Date of Inscription: 2024
Criteria: (ii)(iii)(iv)
Property : 20.81 ha

Buffer zone: 22.61 ha
Dossier: 1720
S3 18 36.95 E40 1 2.15
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
Protections
by other conservation instruments

1 protection / 1 element

Biosphere Reserves (1 element)

Malindi-Watamu Arabuko Sokoke

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026