World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Nahanni National Park
Nahanni National Park
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Nahanni National Park

Located along the South Nahanni River, one of the most spectacular wild rivers in North America, this park contains deep canyons and huge waterfalls, as well as a unique limestone cave system. The park is also home to animals of the boreal forest, such as wolves, grizzly bears and caribou. Dall's sheep and mountain goats are found in the park's alpine environment.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Nahanni National Park World Heritage property, located in Canada’s Northwest Territories, is a 470,000 hectare undisturbed natural area of deep river canyons cutting through mountain ranges, with huge waterfalls and complex cave systems. The geomorphology of the property is outstanding in its wealth of form and complexity of evolution. Fluvial processes and features predominate. Within the property are examples of almost every distinct category of river or stream that is known, along with one of North America’s most impressive waterfalls, Virginia Falls. The Flat River and South Nahanni River are older than the mountains they dissect and have produced the finest examples of river canyons in the world, north of 60º. The injection of igneous rock through tectonic activity has resulted in spectacular granitic peaks.

Criterion (vii): The South Nahanni River is one of the most spectacular wild rivers in North America, with deep canyons, huge waterfalls, and spectacular karst terrain, cave systems and hot springs. Exposure of geologic and geomorphologic features includes the meanders of ancient rivers, now raised high above present river levels.

Criterion (viii): In Nahanni National Park, there is exceptional representation of on-going geological processes, notably fluvial erosion, tectonic uplift, folding and canyon development, wind erosion, karst and pseudo-karst landforms, and a variety of hot springs. The major geologic and geomorphologic features provide a combination of geological processes that are globally unique.

Integrity

Nahanni National Park was established in 1976 and was inscribed on the World Heritage List in 1978. In 2009, Canada greatly expanded the limits of the national park by adding 2,500,000 hectares to establish the Nahanni National Park Reserve. The expanded protected area now totals about 3 million hectares and provides important protection to the property’s geological heritage and the South Nahanni River system. The boundary of the World Heritage site remains as originally inscribed. Over 95% of the World Heritage property is now surrounded by the larger national park reserve boundary, providing it with excellent protection and ensuring the integrity of its Outstanding Universal Value.

As a result of its remote location, the absence of permanent inhabitants, a very low human population density in the greater region, the support from Indigenous peoples, and national park legislation that prioritizes management for maintenance of ecological integrity, there are no significant threats to the property. There is, however, the potential for resource development in the broader ecosystem surrounding the property.

Protection and management requirements

Nahanni National Park World Heritage property is within Nahanni National Park Reserve, established under the Canada National Parks Act which provides effective legal protection for the property. Under the requirements of this legislation, the property has a management plan that provides direction for protecting the features of the property that are the basis for its Outstanding Universal Value, as well as for providing opportunities for visitors to experience and learn about the park reserve.

The park reserve is managed co-operatively with the Dehcho First Nations (DFN), the umbrella group that represents First Nations and Métis people in the Dehcho region of the Northwest Territories. The Naha Dehé Consensus Team, made up of representatives from Parks Canada and the DFN, is the body that undertakes co-operative management to maintain the ecological integrity of the national park reserve. The Consensus Team works with other levels of government, and other partners and stakeholders in its ongoing efforts to ensure the ecological integrity of Nahanni National Park Reserve.

Special attention will be given over the long term to monitoring and taking appropriate actions related to a number of factors in and near the property. Specifically, these include potential impacts from proposed mining developments near, but not within the World Heritage property. Parks Canada continues to work closely with federal and territorial departments on permitting and monitoring for these proposed mining sites. All mining activities will be subject to an Environmental Impact Assessment and if approved will be further subjected to the appropriate regulations to mitigate risks to the ecosystem. Park staff and its network of partners work together to monitor park ecosystems for stressors from inside and outside the property, which could include human use such as biological and physical resource use; changes in wildlife populations; ecological disturbances such as fire; potential impacts from climate change and sudden geological events; and the potential for invasive or hyper-abundant species.

Notes
Property inscribed for both geological and ecological values under natural criterion N (ii) before 1994. Criterion N (i) [Operational Guidelines 2002] was added. For more details see Decision 30.COM 8D.1.
Links
Nahanni National Park Reserve, Parks Canada

Protectedplanet.net

News  1
Nahanni National Park Reserve is expanded
9 June 2009
Canada
Date of Inscription: 1978
Criteria: (vii)(viii)
Property : 476,560 ha

Dossier: 24
Northwest Territories
N61 32 50 W125 35 22
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2006 2004 2003 2002 2001
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026