World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
L’Anse aux Meadows National Historic Site
L’Anse aux Meadows National Historic Site
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
L’Anse aux Meadows National Historic Site

At the tip of the Great Northern Peninsula of the island of Newfoundland, the remains of an 11th-century Viking settlement are evidence of the first European presence in North America. The excavated remains of wood-framed peat-turf buildings are similar to those found in Norse Greenland and Iceland.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

L’Anse aux Meadows National Historic Site contains the excavated remains of a complete 11th-century Viking settlement, the earliest evidence of Europeans in North America. Situated at the tip of the Great Northern Peninsula of the island of Newfoundland, this exceptional archaeological site consists of eight timber-framed turf structures built in the same style as those found in Norse Greenland and Iceland from the same period. The buildings include three dwellings, one forge and four workshops, on a narrow terrace overlooking a peat bog and small brook near the shore of Epaves Bay in the Straight of Belle Isle.

Artifacts found at the site show evidence of activities including iron production and woodworking, likely used for ship repair, as well as indications that those who used the camp voyaged further south. The remnants correspond with the stories told in the Vinland Sagas, which document the voyages of Leif Erikson and other Norse explorers who ventured westward across the Atlantic Ocean from Iceland and Greenland to find and explore new territory, a significant achievement in the history of human migration and discovery.

Criterion (vi): L’Anse aux Meadows is the first and only known site established by Vikings in North America and the earliest evidence of European settlement in the New World. As such, it is a unique milestone in the history of human migration and discovery.

Integrity

Measuring 7991 ha, L’Anse aux Meadows National Historic Site is of sufficient size to ensure that the property is protected, remains intact, and takes in the full extent of the known Norse remains in the region. Its boundaries extend far beyond the areas that contain Norse archaeological remains, thus providing ample protection of the complete representation of the features and processes that convey the property’s Outstanding Universal Value.

L’Anse aux Meadows National Historic Site is in stable condition. The archaeological site has been reburied in such a way as to protect the remnants from deterioration. There are no known or anticipated threats to the property, it is not at risk of degradation and does not suffer from adverse effects of development or neglect, the totality being managed as a National Historic Site by Parks Canada Agency.

Authenticity

L’Anse aux Meadows National Historic Site is authentic in location and setting, forms and designs, and materials and substances. Ample archival evidence shows the property to correspond with the journeys described in the Norse sagas.

Extensive archaeological research after the site’s discovery in 1960 revealed that the timber-framed structures were constructed with a particular type of gabled roof and covered with turf taken from the surrounding peat bog. The layout of the rooms, fireplaces and openings followed the characteristics of Norse design. Excavation uncovered evidence of iron production at the site, as well as approximately 800 wooden, bronze, bone, and stone artefacts that confirm the Norse origins of the property and provide important information on the work and lifestyle of the site’s occupants.

Protection and management requirements

L’Anse aux Meadows was established as a National Historic Site in 1975 under a Federal-Provincial agreement between Canada and the Province of Newfoundland and Labrador. The property is legally protected under the Parks Canada Agency Act (1998) and the Canada National Parks Act (2000), and the site has a management plan in place, which is reviewed and renewed at regular intervals. The management plan requires that the resources directly related to the reasons for designation as a national historic site are not impaired or under threat; that the reasons for designation are effectively communicated to the public; and that heritage values, including Outstanding Universal Value, are respected in all decisions and actions affecting the property.

The agreement that established L’Anse aux Meadows National Historic Site states that the Government of Canada and the Government of the Province of Newfoundland and Labrador shall consult together to ensure that the future development of the communities and areas adjacent to the property is planned jointly and is in keeping with their proximity to this internationally significant property.

Parks Canada manages visitation and conservation at the site, and the artefact collection associated with the Viking base camp is stable and is displayed and/or stored under appropriate conditions. Special attention shall be given over the long term to monitoring for issues that could impact the state of conservation in the future and taking appropriate actions to protect the site.

Links
World Heritage in Canada (Parks Canada)

L'Anse aux Meadows (Parks Canada)

Activities 1
Youth Component, 32nd session of the World Heritage Committee (2008)
Canada
Date of Inscription: 1978
Minor boundary modification inscribed year: 2017
Criteria: (vi)
Property : 7,991 ha

Dossier: 4bis
Province of Newfoundland and Labrador
N51 35 05 W55 33 0
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026