World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Walled City of Baku with the Shirvanshah's ...
Walled City of Baku with the Shirvanshah's Palace and Maiden Tower
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Assistance
Walled City of Baku with the Shirvanshah's Palace and Maiden Tower

Built on a site inhabited since the Palaeolithic period, the Walled City of Baku reveals evidence of Zoroastrian, Sasanian, Arabic, Persian, Shirvani, Ottoman, and Russian presence in cultural continuity. The Inner City (Icheri Sheher) has preserved much of its 12th-century defensive walls. The 12th-century Maiden Tower (Giz Galasy) is built over earlier structures dating from the 7th to 6th centuries BC, and the 15th-century Shirvanshahs' Palace is one of the pearls of Azerbaijan's architecture.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Rising from the south shore of the Apsheron Peninsular at the western edge of the Caspian Sea, the Walled City of Baku was founded on a site inhabited since the Palaeolithic period. The city reveals, along with the dominant Azerbaijani element, evidence of Zoroastrian, Sassanian, Arabic, Persian, Shirvani, Ottoman, and Russian presence in cultural continuity. The inner city (Icherisheher) has preserved much of its 12th-century defensive walls, which define the character of the property. The most ancient monument of Icherisheher is the Maiden Tower – symbol of the city of Baku. Some evidence suggests that the construction of the Tower might have been as early as the 7th-6th centuries BC. Another monument of universal value, one of the pearls of Azerbaijan's architecture is the 12th- to 15th-century Shirvanshahs' Palace, located at the highest point of Icherisheher. Within the Palace complex are the Divankhana (reception hall) or, as some researchers believe, the Tomb of Shah, the residential building of Shirvanshahs, the remains of Key-Kubad Mosque, the Tomb of Seyid Yahya Bakuvi, Murad’s Gate (the only monument of the 16th century), the Tomb of Shirvanshahs’ Family, the Shah Mosque and the Palace bath-house. Earlier monuments of Icherisheher include the Mohammed Mosque, together with the adjacent minaret built in 1078, and remains of the 9th- to 10th-century mosque near the Maiden Tower.

There are also numerous historical-architectural monuments of the medieval period such as caravanserais, hamams (bath-houses), mosques and residential buildings of the 18th to 20th centuries located within the property.

The magnificence of Icherisheher lies in the combination of its distinct architectural monuments and its historically composed architectural spatial planning with original street views, which have merged into a single entity to reflect its long history and the melding of cultures that have influenced its development over the past nine centuries. Icherisheher is still a living, vibrant city with residential areas housing local communities.

Criterion (iv): The Walled City of Baku represents an outstanding and rare example of an historic urban ensemble and architecture with influence from Zoroastrian, Sassanian, Arabic, Persian, Shirvani, Ottoman, and Russian cultures.

Integrity

The boundary of the property follows the boundary of the Walled City, which with the remains of its walls, planning and buildings encompasses the attributes that express its Outstanding Universal Value.

Considerable erosion of the fabric of some of the buildings within the Walled City occurred soon after inscription of the property, partly as a result of an earthquake but also due to illegal demolition and uncontrolled development. The property was removed from the List of World Heritage in Danger in 2009.

The setting of the property has changed somewhat since inscription, due to building development that accompanied the disintegration of the previous Soviet management system and is still vulnerable to negative visual impacts of adjacent new development. The new management structure effectively combines municipal functions as well as property conservation functions.

Authenticity

Following inscription, the demolition and complete reconstruction of some buildings impacted adversely the authenticity of the overall urban ensemble. As a result of measures taken to enable removal of the property from the List of World Heritage in Danger, the remaining attributes can be said to convey the property’s Outstanding Universal Value in terms of materials, design and urban planning. The coherence and functions of the historic city are supported by a vibrant local community.

Protection and managements requirements

The Walled City of Baku and its buffer zone are inventoried and protected as National Monuments. The inner city is protected by Presidential Decrees of 2005 and 2007, and the buffer zone is protected by a Decree issued by the Cabinet of Ministers.

In 2007, the Administration of the State Historical-Architectural Reserve “Icherisheher” (SHAHAR), established under the Cabinet of Ministers, was formally given full responsibility for management of the property instead of the authorities of the Ministry of Culture and Tourism and the City of Baku. SHAHAR is independently staffed and funded by the Government. An Integrated Area Management Action Plan (IAMAP) has been developed, together with a Conservation Master Plan.

The Conservation Master Plan has been reviewed by all stakeholders and formally approved, and will be integrated with the IAMAP and adopted in the urban planning system of the City of Baku. The actions in the IAMAP will be implemented, including preparation of a comprehensive long-term strategy for the protection of Icherisheher and its buffer zone; documentation and monitoring of the state of conservation of the property; formulation of standards and procedures for the regulation of rehabilitation of existing buildings and eventual new constructions; maintenance and improvement of public spaces; development of strategic interventions to improve the quality of life in the area; and organisation and management of community outreach and education programmes.

There is a need to ensure that planning controls respect the characteristics of the modest houses that contribute to the overall qualities of Baku as a reflection of a medieval city. Numerous parts of the property retain original medieval street views and attention must be paid to preserve such views where they exist. Controls on development of the wider setting of the city is also needed so as to ensure it retains its links with the sea and does not become a small island within high-rise developments.

Links
Icherisheher Tiktok (only in Azerbaijani)

Icherisheher LinkedIn (only in Azerbaijani)

Icherisheher Twitter (only in Azerbaijani)

Icherisheher Youtube page (only in Azerbaijani)

Icherisheher Instagram (only in Azerbaijani)

Icherisheher Facebook (only in Azerbaijani)

Icherisheher Official Website

Azerbaijan Tourism Board

Google Arts & Culture: Story

Gobustan National Historical-Artistic Preserve

Administration of State Historical-Architectural Reserve "Icherisheher"

 View photos from OUR PLACE the World Heritage collection

Activities 2
World Heritage Earthen Architecture Programme (WHEAP)
World Heritage Cities Programme
News  8
Azerbaijan to host 2019 session of World Heritage Committee
10 July 2018
Five World Heritage sites in Azerbaijan and Belgium granted “enhanced protection” in the event of armed conflict
20 December 2013
World Heritage sites participate in Earth Hour 2013
22 March 2013
World Heritage sites participate in Earth Hour
28 March 2012
More add
Azerbaijan
Date of Inscription: 2000
Criteria: (iv)
Property : 21.5 ha

Buffer zone: 12 ha
Dossier: 958
Apsheron peninsula
N40 22 0 E49 49 60
List of World Heritage in Danger

Inscription Year on the List of World Heritage in Danger

2003 -2009
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2016 2014 2012 2010 2009 2008 2007 2006 2005 2004 2003 2002
Protections
by other conservation instruments

2 protections / 14 elements

2003 Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage (13 elements)

Art of crafting and playing with Kamantcheh/Kamancha, a bowed string musical instrument
Art of illumination: Təzhib/Tazhib/Zarhalkori/Tezhip/Naqqoshlik
Art of miniature
Chovqan, a traditional Karabakh horse-riding game in the Republic of Azerbaijan
Craftsmanship and performance art of the Tar, a long-necked string musical instrument
Craftsmanship and performing art of balaban/mey
Craftsmanship of mother of pearl inlay
Culture of Çay (tea), a symbol of identity, hospitality and social interaction
Dolma making and sharing tradition, a marker of cultural identity
Flatbread making and sharing culture: Lavash, Katyrma, Jupka, Yufka
Heritage of Dede Qorqud/Korkyt Ata/Dede Korkut, epic culture, folk tales and music
Pehlevanliq culture: traditional zorkhana games, sports and wrestling
Telling tradition of Nasreddin Hodja/ Molla Nesreddin/ Molla Ependi/ Apendi/ Afendi Kozhanasyr Anecdotes
Second Protocol to the 1954 Hague Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict (1 element)

Walled City of Baku with the Shirvanshah's Palace and Maiden Tower

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026