World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Routes of Santiago de Compostela in France
Routes of Santiago de Compostela in France
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Routes of Santiago de Compostela in France

Santiago de Compostela was the supreme goal for countless thousands of pious pilgrims who converged there from all over Europe throughout the Middle Ages. To reach Spain pilgrims had to pass through France, and the group of important historical monuments included in this inscription marks out the four routes by which they did so.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Throughout the Middle Ages, Santiago de Compostela was a major destination for numerous pilgrims from all over Europe. To reach Spain, the pilgrims had to pass through France. Four symbolic routes depart from Paris, Vézelay, Le Puy and Arles and cross the Pyrenees, joining the numerous itineraries taken by the travellers. Pilgrimage churches, simple sanctuaries, hospitals, bridges, roadside crosses bear witness to the spiritual and physical aspects of the pilgrimages. Spiritual exercise and manifestation of faith, the pilgrimage has also influenced the secular world in playing a decisive role in the birth and circulation of ideas and art.

Large sanctuaries, such as the Saint Sernin Church in Toulouse or Amiens Cathedral - some cited in the Calixtine Codex - as well as other properties, illustrate the routes and conditions of the pilgrimage over the centuries. Seventy-one elements associated with the pilgrimage have been retained to illustrate their geographic diversity, the chronological development of the pilgrimage between the 11th and 15th centuries, and the essential functions of the architecture, such as the old hospital for pilgrims at Pons, or the “Pilgrims” Bridge over the Boralde. In addition, seven sections of the Chemin du Puy are included, covering nearly 160 km of the route.

Criterion (ii): The Pilgrimage Route of Santiago de Compostela played a key role in religious and cultural exchange and development during the later Middle Ages, and this is admirably illustrated by the carefully selected monuments on the routes followed by pilgrims in France.

Criterion (iv): The spiritual and physical well-being of the pilgrims travelling to Santiago de Compostela were met by the development of a number of specialized types of edifice, many of which originated or were further developed on the French sections.

Criterion (vi): The Pilgrimage Route of Santiago de Compostela bears exceptional witness to the power and influence of the Christian faith among people of all classes and countries in Europe during in the Middle Ages.

Integrity

The proposed edifices and ensembles represent, in their diversity, a true evocation of the context of the pilgrimage to Santiago de Compostela. The same applies to proposed sectors of the route that are only examples of the ensemble of the routes followed by the pilgrims. The edifices along the route share in common the direct testimony, conserved and transmitted to the present day, of the practice of the pilgrimage as it occurred in France in the Middle Ages. The intact evocative power has revitalized a cultural approach of the pilgrimage to Compostela. Since the 1990s, the Routes of Santiago de Compostela in France are the subject of continually increasing numbers of visitors, which has to be accommodated with road development.

Authenticity

The accommodation and care establishments presented are undoubtedly devoted to the pilgrimage by the historic texts and the conserved architectural or decorative elements. The properties presented illustrate in the most loyal and credible manner the ensemble of rituals and practises linked to the pilgrimage to Santiago de Compostela. This includes the routes, pilgrimage churches or simple sanctuaries, hospitals and bridges. The spiritual path of the pilgrimage was marked by the veneration of relics of saints along the itinerary. The richest edifices, privileged points of passage of the route, are recognizable for their specific architectural layout, suitable for organizing the circulation of pilgrims. The more modest churches, stops for contemplation or rest, located on the main or secondary routes, bear testimony by their sculpted and painted decor representing religious scenes or legends linked to the devotion of Saint James.

Protection and management requirements

The 71 edifices and building ensembles are for the most part the property of the communes, and in some cases, property of the Departmental Council and private individuals. The majority of the religious buildings are devoted to the Catholic faith. Their conservation is the responsibility of their owners, with financial assistance and under the technical and scientific control of the services of the State.

They are covered by protective measures in application of the Heritage Code (listing or inscription as Historic Monument), the Environment Code, as well as local urbanism plans (PLU). These buildings also generate protective boundaries of 500 m. Some of the boundaries are susceptible to modification in order to render the protective area more relevant.

Furthermore, the areas where the buildings and ensembles are located also benefit from protection either under the Heritage Code (remarkable heritage sites), or under the Environment Code (listed or inscribed sites).

In any event, these protective boundaries ensure that the advice of the territorial architectural and heritage services is mandatory to authorize all works.

The sections of the route included in the inscribed property are the Grande Randonnée hiking trails (GR65) that benefit for the most part, from protection under the Departmental Plan for Walking and Hiking Routes (PDIPR).

It also benefits from the protection of the different historic monuments that are found along the route.

The management of the property is coordinated at the national level by the Prefect of the Occitanie Region, who was appointed Prefect Coordinator. The Prefect chairs the Interregional Coordinating Committee that annually brings together all the owners of the components of the property. The Prefect also relies on the Agency for Interregional Cooperation and Network of the Routes of Saint-Jacques-de-Compostelle (ACIR), manager of the inscribed site
Links
Les chemins de Compostelle (in French only)

Instagram page

Facebook page

Chemins de Compostelle, patrimoine mondial (in French only)

 View photos from OUR PLACE the World Heritage collection

Agence française des Chemins de Compostelle (in French only)

News  2
International Day for Monuments and Sites 2021 - Complex Pasts: Diverse Futures
16 April 2021
UNESCO World Heritage Committee Adds 30 Sites to World Heritage List
2 December 1998
Media
play_arrow NHK World Heritage 100 Series
play_arrow Routes of Santiago de Compostela in France (UNESCO/NHK)
France
Date of Inscription: 1998
Minor boundary modification inscribed year: 2025
Criteria: (ii)(iv)(vi)
Property : 100.9066 ha

Buffer zone: 256,672.45 ha
Dossier: 868bis
Serial: yes

Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
Protections
by other conservation instruments

4 protections / 7 elements

1972 World Heritage Convention (1 element)

Pyrénées - Mont Perdu
Biosphere Reserves (2 elements)

Bassin de la Dordogne
Camargue (delta du Rhône)
Geoparks (1 element)

Causses de Quercy UNESCO Global Geopark
RAMSAR (3 elements)

Baie du Mont Saint-Michel
La Petite Camargue
Marais et tourbières des vallées de la Somme et de l'Avre

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026