World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Kronborg Castle
Kronborg Castle
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Kronborg Castle

Located on a strategically important site commanding the Sund, the stretch of water between Denmark and Sweden, the Royal castle of Kronborg at Helsingør (Elsinore) is of immense symbolic value to the Danish people and played a key role in the history of northern Europe in the 16th-18th centuries. Work began on the construction of this outstanding Renaissance castle in 1574, and its defences were reinforced according to the canons of the period's military architecture in the late 17th century. It has remained intact to the present day. It is world-renowned as Elsinore, the setting of Shakespeare's Hamlet.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis 

Kronborg Castle is located north of Elsinore on a strategically important site commanding the Sound (Øresund), a narrow stretch of water between Denmark and Sweden. From the sixteenth to the eighteenth centuries, Kronborg Castle played a key role in the history of Northern Europe.

The Sound is the gateway to the Baltic Sea and from 1429 to 1857, Denmark controlled this passage thanks to Kronborg Castle, positioned at the narrowest part of the Sound, which is only four kilometres wide. Around 1.8 million ships passed through the Sound during this period and all of them had to pay a toll at Kronborg Castle. For this reason Kronborg Castle and its fortress became a symbol of Denmark’s power. The Sound toll was not just a source of income; it was also a political instrument. By favouring the shipping trade of selected nations or by allowing their navies free passage, Denmark was in a position to create important alliances. The control of the Sound was essential and it became an important issue in the motives and courses of several wars. For this reason Kronborg Castle was of great significance, not just for Denmark, but for all major seafaring nations.

In the 1420s, Eric of Pomerania built the first castle, the ”Krogen”, on this unique site. Remnants of the old walls can still be seen at the castle today. In 1574 King Frederik II began the construction of the outstanding Renaissance castle and the surrounding fortifications, which would eventually be known as Kronborg Castle. Following the disastrous fire of 1629 the castle was reconstructed almost exactly as it was before. The Chapel, which was the only building not to have been ravaged by the fire, has preserved its original altar, gallery, and pews, with fine carvings and painted panels.

The castle itself is a Renaissance building with four wings surrounding a spacious courtyard. The bright sandstone facades are characterized by horizontal bands and the front walls are balanced by towers and spires. The castle is extensively and richly decorated with sandstone ornaments in unique and imaginative designs. The Great Hall (the banqueting hall) is one of the most exquisite rooms from this time – and the largest of its kind in Northern Europe. Kronborg Castle is also world famous as the setting of Shakespeare’s Hamlet.

Kronborg Castle was admired for its beauty as a castle and feared for its strength as a fortress. The castle was protected by tall ramparts and strong angular bastions. The overall impression of Kronborg Castle is closely associated with its architecture and location, which stress the castle's symbolic, commercial, and strategic importance.

Criterion (iv): Kronborg Castle is an outstanding example of the Renaissance castle, and one which played a highly significant role in the history of this region of northern Europe.

Integrity

All the elements required to express Kronborg’s value as a Renaissance castle and military fortress are found within the borders of the inscribed area. For the purposes of effective protection of the important views, a permanent buffer zone has been established and view corridors have been designated. At the time of inscription, a temporary buffer zone of 100 meters had been established around Kronborg Castle. Furthermore, it was required that the passage between Kronborg Castle and the medieval city of Elsinore be opened up. The buffer zone should be defined once an overall plan is decided for this area, including the removal of parts of the former shipyard.

Authenticity

Over the centuries, Kronborg Castle has undergone several alterations. In 1629 the castle was destroyed by a fire, but it was rebuilt shortly after in almost precisely the same shape. In 1658 the fortress was bombarded and conquered by the Swedish army, which subsequently plundered the castle. In 1785, when the military moved into the castle, several alterations were made to the interior space. In 1924-38, when the military no longer occupied the fortress, a thorough restoration took place and the alterations were removed. In 1991 the military finally abandoned the Kronborg area. Throughout the years, the fortifications surrounding the castle have been altered and expanded to accommodate new arms and their ranges. In 1882, when the Elsinore shipyard was founded, the fortress area was partially destroyed. After the closure and demolition of parts of the shipyard in 1982, restoration projects were carried out in order to restore and re-establish the fortified area’s previous size and shape for the purpose of enhancing the experience of the castle’s strategic value.

The exterior of Kronborg Castle has always been well maintained and considerable efforts have been made to ensure its authenticity in terms of design, choice of construction material, and craftsmanship. Continual restoration of the castle’s facades is carried out, including the carving of replicas of the unique sandstone ornaments. All the work on the castle is undertaken with respect for the original choices of building materials and designs.

Protection and management requirements

Kronborg Castle and the surrounding fortifications belong to the Danish State. The castle and the adjoining fortress are listed buildings and protected in accordance with the Preservation of Buildings Act and the Museum Act. This means that all changes must be approved by the Danish Agency for Culture. The castle and its fortress are managed by the Agency for Palaces and Cultural Properties in the Ministry of Culture.

With a view to strengthening the protection of Kronborg Castle, Elsinore City Council and the Danish Agency for Culture joined forces and drew up a final agreement on the buffer zone and the establishment of view corridors. The agreement was implemented in an addendum to the municipal plan, which was approved April 2011. The town plan of the Elsinore Municipality outlines the main features of the city’s development and the framework for the district plan.

The management plan for Kronborg Castle has been prepared and addresses the long term threats against Kronborg. These are mainly building and ground decay, as a result of lack of maintenance, climate or due to fire. These threats are identified and prevented through inspection, maintenance and monitoring, which are carried out by the Agency for Palaces and Cultural Properties. Although Kronborg is a robust fortress, more visitors may cause an increase in the wear and vandalism. This potential threat is addressed through information and guidance for the visitors, electronic and physical surveillance and an increased focus on maintenance. The management plan is regularly reviewed

Links
 View photos from OUR PLACE the World Heritage collection

Kronborg Castle

News  1
World Heritage Committee Inscribes 61 New Sites on World Heritage List
30 November 2000
Media
play_arrow Kronborg Castle (UNESCO/NHK)
play_arrow NHK World Heritage 100 Series
Denmark
Date of Inscription: 2000
Criteria: (iv)
Dossier: 696rev
Island of Sjaelland, City of Helsingör, Capital Region of Denmark
N56 2 20.004 E12 37 15
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026