World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
National History Park – Citadel, Sans Souci, ...
National History Park – Citadel, Sans Souci, Ramiers
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Assistance
National History Park – Citadel, Sans Souci, Ramiers

These Haitian monuments date from the beginning of the 19th century, when Haiti proclaimed its independence. The Palace of Sans Souci, the buildings at Ramiers and, in particular, the Citadel serve as universal symbols of liberty, being the first monuments to be constructed by black slaves who had gained their freedom.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Bref synthesis

In the northern part of Haiti, the National History Park – Citadel, Sans-Souci, Ramiers (NHP-CSSR) is located in the central zone of the northern massif that extends to the Dominican Republic. The NHP-CSSR is located between the coastal plains and the mountainous interior of the region. The choice to build the Citadel on the summits responded to a strategy for interior protection, differing from the coastal defence strategy inherited from French colonization.
Created by presidential decree in 1978, to preserve the splendid natural scenery of the mountainous peaks covered with luxuriant vegetation, the NHP-CSSR covers an area of 25 km2. It includes the monumental ensemble of the Palace of Sans-Souci and its annex buildings, the Citadelle Henry and the Ramiers site, universal symbols of liberty, being the first monuments to be constructed by black slaves who had gained their freedom. For Haitians, they represent the first monuments of their independence.
On 1 January 1804, after fourteen years of struggle by the island’s black slaves against the colonists, Jean-Jacques Dessalines, the principal leader of the revolution, proclaimed the independent Republic of Haiti. The “Emperor” Dessalines immediately entrusted to one of his generals, Henri Christophe, the task of constructing an immense fortress on the Pic Laferrière, to protect the young republic.
Both military installation and political manifesto, the Citadelle Henry, constructed to a height of 970 m, is one of the best examples of the art of military engineering of the early 19th century. The plans are the work of the Haitian Henry Barré, but it is probable that General Christophe played the preponderant role in their formulation. The Citadelle Henry, covering an area of about one hectare, is a vast quadrilateral comprising four buildings protected by four flanking towers built around a central courtyard, and forming on several levels a bastioned front of batteries and barracks. The projecting masses, remarkably articulated to allow an integrated use of artillery capabilities, an elaborate system of water supply and cisterns, and colossal defensive walls render the citadel impregnable. It can shelter a garrison of 2000 men, or 5000 if necessary.
At the death of Dessalines, in 1806, the Republic of Haiti was divided into separate states : the southern part, governed by Pétion, and the north, where Christophe proclaimed himself king  in 1811. The Citadelle Henry, originally conceived as a monument to the defence of liberty, was maintained as a fortress by the despot and was inaugurated in 1813.
At the same time, King Christophe (Henry 1) undertook the construction of an astonishing palace surrounded by gardens, situated at the foot of the access road to the Citadelle near to the village of Milot: the Palace Sans-Souci. This large architectural ensemble responded to the need to concentrate the essential administrative services of the new monarchy around the royal residence. Surrounded by mountainous peaks covered with luxurious vegetation, the Palace and its buildings were grouped in an amphitheatre covering an area of about eight hectares. The architectural ensemble comprised the royal residence, that is the Palace itself that Henry 1 used as principal residence until his death in 1820; the administrative buildings (State Council, Palace of Ministries, Royal Mint, library) ; the residence of the Crown Prince located to the west of the esplanade for official events; the stables, barracks, prisons, arsenal, various maintenance workshops, hospital, goldsmiths, etc.  The ensemble was embellished with gardens, basins and fountains. Inaugurated in 1813, the Palace Sans-Souci was looted at the death of the king in 1820. Since then, abandoned, it was seriously damaged by the earthquake of 1842. Nevertheless, by its size, it remains an impressive and coherent ruin, owing its bizarre beauty to an exceptional harmony with the mountainous setting, as well as its recourse to diverse and yet reputedly irreconcilable architectural models. The Baroque staircase and the classical terraces, the stepped gardens reminiscent of Potsdam and Vienna, the canals and basins freely inspired by Versailles, impart an indefinable hallucinatory quality to the creation of the megalomaniac king.
The Ramiers site is a small plateau with sub-foundations and a some sections of wall of a residential ensemble protected by two pairs of fortified redoubts. The site commands a superb panorama and provides an unexpected view of the Citadelle, with its huge silhouette standing out against the empty skyline.
Unique testimonies directly connected to the independence of Haiti, resulting from a general uprising of slaves deported from Africa, are united here. The French Revolution of 1789 led to serious social upheavals in the Lesser Antilles, as in Santo Domingo. The most important was the slave revolt that resulted in 1793 with the abolition of slavery, decision endorsed and generalized throughout the French colonies by the National Convention six months later (First abolition of slavery, (le 16 pluviôse an II), [4 February, 1794]). At the end of a violent war, the Declaration of Independence of the country was proclaimed on 1 January 1804. The name « Haiti » (ancient name ‘taïno’ of the island before the arrival of the Europeans in 1492) was given to the country. Since then, Haiti remains the first state in the world resulting from a slave revolt.

Criterion (iv) : The National Historic Park - – Citadelle, Sans-Souci, Ramiers is an eminent example of a type of structure illustrating the historical situation of Haiti at the dawn of its independence.

Criterion  (vi) : The ephemeral republic of Jean-Jacques Dessalines bears a universal historical significance: it is the first state founded in the contemporary epoch by black slaves who had won their liberty.

Integrity

The environmental context of the of the National Historic Park - Citadelle, Sans-Souci, Ramiers, still retains its original characteristics. The harmony of the landscape with the Dondon Valley and the surrounding hillocks, demonstrating a representative selection of the different environments of the region, constitutes a coherent human system. The topographical perception of axis between coastal and inland areas, justifying the occupation of this territory by the construction of these buildings, fortifications and palaces, is very strong.
Although damaged by the earthquake of 1842, the Citadelle Henry and the Ramiers fortifications conserve all their original coherence from both their built aspect and their military function.
Although looted at the death of Henry 1 and seriously damaged by the 1842 earthquake, the ruins of the Palace Sans-Souci largely conserve their essential and original architectural characteristics: general proportions, harmonious openings, significant architectural elements and details, component materials, etc.
However, important rainwater infiltrations constitute a threat to the precarious stability of the ruins, in particular the foundations.
The inscribed site is moreover mainly threatened by deforestation, subsistence agricuture, lack of central management and illegal urbanization of the towns of Milot and Dondon, adjacent to its boundaries. Disorganized tourism could also affect the integrity of the ruins of the Palace Sans-Souci. 

Authenticity

The authenticity of the National Historic Park - Citadelle, Sans-Souci, Ramiers, is incontestable in terms of position and environment, spatial organization, form and conception, material and substance.
Implementation of an important intervention for protection against water infiltration of the ruins of the Citadelle Henry has been undertaken. This work, accomplished with technical assistance from UNESCO from 1979 to 1990, has preserved the integrity of the historic monument in accordance with Article 9 of the Venice Charter. Since 2013, the Institute for the Protection of National Heritage (ISPAN) has undertaken important works concerning the strengthening of the fragile parts of the work and improvements for visitor management.

Protection and management requirements

The National Historic Park - Citadelle, Sans-Souci, Ramiers is the property of the Republic of Haiti. The protection of the site is covered by the 1941 Law on the Protection of Monuments and Sites. The National Historic Park that protects the monumental zone of the Citadelle, the Palace Sans-Souci and the Ramiers Site was created by presidential decree of 1978. ISPAN, the specialized agency of Haiti, created in 1979, is the agency responsible for its administration.
The National Historic Park is directed by an Interministerial Management Council since 2013, comprising representatives of the six ministries, under the presidence of the Prime Minister of the government of the Republic. The permanent Secretariat of this Council is ensured by the Directorate General of ISPAN, the State focal point.
At the beginning of 2014, ISPAN established a temporary management structure, the principal mission of which was to prepare the Management Plan for the NHP-CSSR and the final structure for its management. The long term anticipated results are the implementation of the Management Plan; the development of the NHP-CSSR in accordance with the participatory and concerted plan; the stabilization and their protection from water infiltration of the historic monuments, and the development of cultural and tourism activities.
The clarification of the boundaries of the Historic Park by markers constitutes significant progress in the comprehension of the site and the preservation of  its Outstanding Universal Value; however, additional work is required to define the buffer zone and establish adequate regulatory measures.

Activities 2
World Heritage Programme for Small Island Developing States (SIDS)
UNESCO for Haiti
News  6
Concern after fire at Milot Church, Haiti
14 April 2020
Director of UNESCO World Heritage Centre meets with Haitian Minister of Culture
18 November 2015
UNESCO's Commitment to Action for the cultural recovery of Jacmel (Haiti) has been accepted by the Clinton Global Initiative (CGI)
9 September 2011
UNESCO for Haiti. 19 April 2011
19 April 2011
More add
Events  2
Expert Meeting for the Revision of the Haitian Law on the Protection of Built Heritage
11 Jul 2011 - 12 Jul 2011
UNESCO for Haiti
19 April 2011
Haiti
Date of Inscription: 1982
Criteria: (iv)(vi)
Property : 25,285.59 ha

Dossier: 180
Département du Nord
N19 34 22.89 W72 14 3.365
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2025 2023 2021 2018 2016 2014 2013 2012 2011 2010 1993 1991
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026