World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Frontiers of the Roman Empire – The Lower ...
Frontiers of the Roman Empire – The Lower German Limes
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Frontiers of the Roman Empire – The Lower German Limes

Following the left bank of the Lower Rhine River for approximately 400 km from the Rhenish Massif in Germany to the North Sea coast in the Netherlands, the transnational property consist of 102 components from one section of the frontiers of the Roman Empire, which in the 2nd century CE, stretched across Europe, the Near East, and North Africa, over 7,500 km. The property comprises military and civilian sites and infrastructure that marked the edge of Lower Germany from the 1st to 5th centuries CE. Archaeological remains in the property include legionary fortresses, forts, fortlets, towers, temporary camps, roads, harbours, a fleet base, a canal and an aqueduct, as well as civilian settlements, towns, cemeteries, sanctuaries, an amphitheatre, and a palace. Almost all of these archaeological remains are buried underground. Waterlogged deposits in the property have enabled a high degree of preservation of both structural and organic materials from the Roman periods of occupation and use.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Frontiers of the Roman Empire – The Lower German Limes ran for 400 km along the Lower Rhine, along the north-eastern boundary of the Roman frontier province of Germania Inferior (Lower Germany), from the Rhenish Massif south of Bonn (Germany) to the North Sea coast (the Netherlands). For more than 450 years from the late 1st century BC, it protected the Roman Empire against Germanic tribes. The first military bases were built in the last decades BC for the conquest of Germanic territories across the Rhine. Once this ambition had failed the left river bank was converted into a fortified frontier. Military installations of varying types and sizes and associated civil structures and infrastructures were built on the edge of the river. The frontier shared the phased disintegration of the Western Roman Empire until the mid-5th century. The remains of the Frontier illustrate the important impacts of the Roman military presence on the landscape and society of the periphery of the Empire.

The serial property of 102 component parts in 44 clusters illustrates the innovative responses of Roman military engineers to the challenges posed by the dynamic landscape of a lowland river, as witnessed by the positioning and design of the military installations and by water management works. Large early bases and small later strongholds are represented, reflecting strategic adaptation and development of military engineering. These first military bases represent the very beginning of the linear perimeter defence of the Roman Empire, which would develop into a coherent frontier system extending over three continents in the 2nd century AD. The wetland conditions have led to an outstanding preservation of timber and other organic remains, providing unparalleled insights into military construction, shipbuilding, logistics and supply of the Empire.

Criterion (ii): The extant remains of Frontiers of the Roman Empire – The Lower German Limes constitute significant elements of the Roman Frontiers present in Europe. With its legionary fortresses, forts, fortlets, watchtowers, linked infrastructure and civilian architecture, it exhibits an important cultural interchange at the height of the Roman Empire, through the development of Roman military architecture, extending the technical knowledge of construction and management to the very edges of the Empire. It reflects the imposition of a complex frontier system on the societies of the north-western part of the Roman Empire, introducing military installations and related civilian settlements, linked through an extensive supporting network. The frontier did not constitute an impregnable barrier, but controlled and allowed the movement of peoples including civilians and merchants, and profound changes and developments in settlement patterns, architecture, landscape design and spatial organisation.

Criterion (iii): As part of the Roman Empire’s system of defence, the Lower German Limes bears an exceptional testimony to the maximum extension of the power of the Roman Empire through the consolidation of its north-western frontiers. The Frontier constitutes a physical manifestation of Roman imperial policy, and the spread of Roman culture and its traditions – military, engineering, architecture, religion, management and politics. The large number of human settlements associated with the defences contribute to an understanding of how soldiers and their families lived in this part of the Roman Empire.

Criterion (iv): Frontiers of the Roman Empire – The Lower German Limes was the earliest linear frontier of the Roman Empire, created as an answer to Rome’s inability to control its northern neighbours by means of diplomacy. Its military installations illustrate the development of the large operational bases of a field army to the smaller installations required by an extended frontier line. Situated in an area which has always been a wetland, with outstanding preservation conditions, Frontiers of the Roman Empire – The Lower German Limes exhibits water management strategies and constructions employed by the military command of the Roman Empire. The component parts contain organic materials and artefacts bearing information of exceptional value to understandings of frontier life and on vanished traditions such as river boat building.

Integrity

The component parts of the serial property have been selected to represent the linearity and attributes of the Frontier, demonstrating the early development of the perimeter defence. They include the range of military installations and associated structures of a frontier system, explaining its functioning and development. The general state of conservation is good to very good. Most archaeological materials and structures are buried and are not exposed to significant threats. The component part boundaries and buffer zones are generally appropriate, although a number of minor revisions to the boundaries and buffer zones are recommended.

Authenticity

The archaeological sites that comprise the Frontiers of the Roman Empire – The Lower German Limes have a high level of authenticity. Virtually all the remains were buried during or soon after the Roman period and have been protected from later developments. The authenticity of form and design of nearly all elements is unaffected by changes after the Roman period. Stone walls, timber and organic remains have been preserved to a high level. The location and setting of the elements of the frontier have in most cases changed considerably by changes to the Rhine and changes in land use, including urbanisation. At four sites the present setting is reminiscent of the Roman landscape. Reconstructions occur at five sites and at others, interpretive visualisations have been established.

Protection and management requirements

The transnational serial property is legally protected by national and state laws on heritage protection of Germany (federal states of North Rhine-Westphalia and Rhineland-Palatinate) and the Netherlands. Management is coordinated by a joint Dutch-German Management Group, which is overseen by an Intergovernmental Committee. The joint Management Group sets out the main lines of the management and supervises the implementation of the national management plans and the periodic reporting, based on a Joint Declaration. The management organisation will cooperate with counterparts of the existing and future inscribed segments of the Frontiers of the Roman Empire. A framework for this international cooperation is provided by the Frontiers of the Roman Empire World Heritage Cluster set up in 2018 to support international collaboration in those fields relevant to the overall management and development of the Frontiers of the Roman Empire in Europe as World Heritage.

The Management Plan is strategic and high-level, and sets out the elements required for a common framework for the transnational serial property. Much of the needed detail will be developed at a later stage, including the development of individual site management plans. Recommendations for strengthening the management include the development of frameworks for research, interpretation and sustainable tourism, and establishment of Heritage Impact Assessment processes (for the component parts in Germany). Development of policy guidance on reconstructions and visualisations should be advanced through the transnational cooperation mechanisms established for the Frontiers of the Roman Empire.

Links
Deutsche UNESCO-Kommission

German Limes Commission's Instagram page

Roman Limes' Instagram page

The German Limes Commission (in German only)

Der Niedergermanische Limes (in German only)

The Romans in the Netherlands (in English and Dutch)

Neder-Germaanse Niedergermanischer Lower German Lines (in Dutch only)

News  1
Cultural sites in Africa, Arab Region, Asia, Europe, and Latin America inscribed on UNESCO’s World Heritage List
27 July 2021
Germany
Netherlands (Kingdom of the)
Date of Inscription: 2021
Criteria: (ii)(iii)(iv)
Property : 812.75 ha

Buffer zone: 7,196.54 ha
Dossier: 1631
Serial: yes

Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

Protections
by other conservation instruments

1 protection / 1 element

RAMSAR (1 element)

Unterer Niederrhein

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026