World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Cultural Landscape of Kenozero Lake
Cultural Landscape of Kenozero Lake
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Cultural Landscape of Kenozero Lake

Located in Kenozero National Park in the north-western area of the European region of the Russian Federation, the property depicts the local cultural landscape that evolved here from the 12th century, following the gradual spread of the Slavic population. It incorporates a number of traditional rural settlements with vernacular wooden architecture. The cultural landscape of Kenozero reflects the communal management of agriculture and nature that developed through the fusion and interaction of the Finno-Ugric forest culture and the Slavic field culture. Wooden churches and other religious buildings, originally decorated with painted ceilings, or “heavens”, are the key social, cultural, and visual landmarks of the area. Their spatial organization, together with sacred sites and symbols, highlight the residents’ spiritual connection with this environment.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Located in Kenozero National Park in the north-western area of the European region of the Russian Federation, the picturesque Kenozero relict cultural landscape depicts the peasant lifestyle that evolved here from the 12th century, following the gradual Slavic colonisation of the region. It incorporates a large number of traditional rural settlements with vernacular wooden architecture set in an evocative landscape of lakes, rivers, forests, and fields that preserve traces of past traditional practices. Wooden churches, churchyards and chapels, many of which were originally decorated with painted ceilings, or “heavens”, are the key social, cultural, and visual landmarks of the area. The spatial organisation of these buildings, together with sacred groves, cemeteries, and wooden crosses dotting the landscape, bear witness to the spiritual connection of the inhabitants to this environment.

Criterion (iii): The exceptional collection of historic wooden buildings of Kenozero Lake, in all their rich diversity of types and uses, is an important representation of the cultural traditions of this region. Traditional woodworking and log construction bear witness to the evolution of early log structures into a sophisticated assembly of domestic and religious buildings. Historic rural settlement patterns and evidence of the use of natural resources in a scenic lake-river landscape are likewise a testimony to a cultural tradition in the Russian North.

Integrity

The boundaries of the property contain all the key attributes necessary to convey its Outstanding Universal Value. A substantial number of traditional wooden buildings have been preserved in their authentic locations and settings within the property. Of the seventy-seven settlements that existed in the early 20th century, sixty-two have been fully preserved, containing 1,520 traditional religious and domestic wooden structures.

Authenticity

The property is authentic in terms of the preserved wooden architectural elements, the patterns of the settlements, and the setting. The monuments of wooden architecture have been preserved with respect for the authenticity of their materials, form, and design. The form and layout of fields and lakeshores around inhabited villages are also maintained. Despite modernisation and several restructurings of agriculture and production in the 20th century, the spirit and feeling of the cultural landscape remain complemented by surviving intangible heritage and traditional practices supported by the management of the property.

Protection and management requirements

The property is protected by several legal mechanisms at the national and regional levels. There is comprehensive legal protection from both cultural and natural sectoral perspectives. Kenozero National Park was established in 1991, and a 500-metre-wide protection zone was delineated in 1995 as an additional protection of the National Park. The protection zone is intended to ensure the preservation of the natural areas, the economic use of which directly affects the biological stability of ecosystems and the Kenozero cultural landscape, and to prevent potential adverse impacts by anthropogenic processes.

Kenozero National Park is the main management authority. The administration of the National Park includes local community members as well as professionals from the region. There are several national, regional, and local strategies in place to support sustainable development. Kenozero National Park oversees all issues regarding the property in coordination with the relevant sectoral institutions as well as local authorities of the respective municipalities.

The management plan of the property and its buffer zone covers the period 2021-2027 and is in the process of implementation. It introduces a unified approach to the management of the National Park, UNESCO Biosphere Reserve, and the property. The plan includes strategies for all these three different domains, integrating conservation and sustainable development within a holistic approach. The protection of the Outstanding Universal Value of the property is the basis for the entire strategic planning process. The management plans for all cultural landscape complexes should be developed. The local communities are recognised as having a special role amongst the stakeholders.

Links
Kenozero National Park

News  1
UNESCO World Heritage: 24 new sites inscribed
1 August 2024
Russian Federation
Date of Inscription: 2024
Criteria: (iii)
Property : 71,030.91 ha

Buffer zone: 68,989.406 ha
Dossier: 1688
N61 55 40.8 E38 10 21.4
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

Protections
by other conservation instruments

1 protection / 1 element

Biosphere Reserves (1 element)

Kenozersky

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026