World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Lednice-Valtice Cultural Landscape
Lednice-Valtice Cultural Landscape
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Lednice-Valtice Cultural Landscape

Between the 17th and 20th centuries, the ruling dukes of Liechtenstein transformed their domains in southern Moravia into a striking landscape. It married Baroque architecture (mainly the work of Johann Bernhard Fischer von Erlach) and the classical and neo-Gothic style of the castles of Lednice and Valtice with countryside fashioned according to English romantic principles of landscape architecture. At 200 km2 , it is one of the largest artificial landscapes in Europe.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The Lednice-Valtice valley is located in South Moravia, Czech Republic. With its 143 km2, the Lednice-Valtice Cultural Landscape is unique because of how architectural, biological and landscape features have been shaped over time.

The Liechtenstein family came first to Lednice in the mid-13th century, and by the end of the 14th century they had also acquired Valtice, nearby. These properties were to become the nucleus of the family's extensive possessions. The two estates were later joined with the neighbouring Břeclav estate to form an organic whole, to serve the recreational requirements of the ducal family and as material evidence of its prestige. The execution of this grandiose design began in the 17th century with the creation of avenues connecting Valtice with other parts of the estate. It continued throughout the 18th century with the construction of a network of paths and scenic trails, imposing order on nature in the manner of the English artists and architects of the Renaissance. The early years of the 19th century saw the application by Duke Jan Josef I of the English concept of landscaped designed park, strongly influenced by the work of Lancelot “Capability” Brown at Stowe and elsewhere in England. Enormous landscaping projects were undertaken, which included the raising of the level of the Lednice Park and the digging of a new channel for the Dyje River. Smaller parks designed based on the English pattern, the so-called Englische Anlagen, were also created around three large ponds.

The composition of the landscape is based on the two country houses, Lednice and Valtice. The Valtice country house has medieval foundations, but it underwent successive remodelling in Renaissance, Mannerist and, most significantly, Baroque styles. Its present Baroque appearance is due to several architects, notably Johann Bernard Fischer von Erlach, Domenico Martinelli and Anton Johann Ospel. Along with the Baroque Church of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary, it is the dominant feature in the system of avenues created in the 17th and 18th centuries. The Lednice country house began as a Renaissance villa of around 1570, and then was progressively changed and remodelled to reflect Baroque, Classical and Neo-Gothic fashions. It was the 1850 Gothic Revival remodelling that brought it into harmony with the prevailing Romanticism of this part of the landscape. The park of the Lednice country house includes architectural objects like a remarkable Palm house, a unique Minaret and other minor structures.

Taking the property as a whole, it is the mingling and interplay of Baroque and Romantic elements that gives it a special character: architecture and landscape are intimately associated with one another. All the buildings are sited with great care at high points, as in the case of the Kolonáda (Colonade), the Rendezvous, Rybniční zámeček (Fishpond Manor) or Pohansko, at the crossing of major routes (the Obelisk), or at the boundary between Moravia and Lower Austria (Hraniční zámeček). The view and vistas are also mutually linked. Most have views of the two dominant features, the Minaret and the Kolonáda, but there are also significant visual connections between other groups (the Temple of Apollo, Belvedere, Janohrad, the Hunting House, the New Farmyard, the Fishpond Manor, the Temple of Three Graces, the Obelisk and St. Hubert Chapel etc.).

An important element in the appearance of this entire area is the very wide range of native and exotic tree species and the planting strategy adopted. The greatest variety is to be found in the parklands which cluster around the two main residences and along the banks of the fishponds between Lednice and Valtice. The Pohansko Manor is built on the site of an important hillfort of the Great Moravian period dating from the 8th century. The 2 km of massive ramparts enclosing an area of 28 ha are still visible. Excavations have revealed the court of the ruler, a church (the plan of which is preserved in situ), several substantial houses and a rich burial ground.

The Lednice-Valtice Cultural Landscape is an exceptional example of a designed cultural landscape, which is made particularly impressive by the number and variety of cultural and natural elements that it contains.

Criterion (i): The Lednice-Valtice Cultural Landscape is an outstanding artistic creation that succeeds in bringing together in harmony cultural monuments from successive periods and both indigenous and exotic natural elements to create an outstanding work of human creativity.

Criterion (ii): By combining the Baroque, Classical and Neo-Gothic architectural styles and by transforming the landscape according to the English romantic principles, Lednice-Valtice estate served as a model throughout the Danube region.

Criterion (iv): The Lednice-Valtice Cultural Landscape is an outstanding example of a cultural landscape designed and created intentionally by a single family during the century of Enlightenment, the Romantic period and later on.

Integrity

The property includes the territory of the former estate of the Liechtenstein family. Its size and delimitation are appropriate. All the key elements conveying the Outstanding Universal Value of the property are situated within its boundaries. There is no buffer zone due to the characteristics of the site. Although the most important elements necessary to convey the Outstanding Universal Value are contained inside the property boundaries, there is a need to protect the key viewpoints outside the boundaries. Because of this fact and the proximity of the town Břeclav and of other villages, a buffer zone may be proposed in the future to keep the visual integrity. The property has a stabilized landscape planning; however, there is a risk of disharmonious development (e.g. transport, urban). Nature conservation organisations exert some pressure on the site that infringes the preservation of the original compound of the landscape and of the woody plants.

Authenticity

The Lednice-Valtice Cultural Landscape is of high authenticity concerning its present form and appearance, which conform closely with the ideas of successive owners over several centuries. The landscape has continued to evolve according to the original planning principles. The prince's country houses serve as architectural museums; their interiors are well maintained and open to the public. All buildings are restored using original materials and techniques. Exotic tree species planted on the grounds come, to a large extent, from seedlings and seeds imported from North America at the beginning of the 19th century. They have been regularly maintained. Plants in the unique Palm house in Lednice are cultivated using traditional methods, with manual labour playing a considerable role.

Protection and management requirements

The Lednice-Valtice Cultural Landscape is protected by Act No. 20/1987 Coll. on State Heritage Preservation as amended. The property is designated a protected cultural landscape. The Lednice and Valtice country houses are designated national cultural heritage sites. The property does not have a buffer zone due to the characteristics of the site but it is neighbouring the Pálava Landscape Protected Area declared by UNESCO in 2003. The Municipal Offices of Valtice, Břeclav, Lednice, Podivín, Hlohovec, the District Office of Břeclav and the Regional Office of the South Moravia Region share responsibility for the preservation of cultural landscape under the overall supervision of the Ministry of Culture. The pressure of development (e.g. transport, urban) is regulated by the Act mentioned above and by the valid land use plans with respect to the visual integrity of the property. So, any actions that might affect the property must be authorized by the appropriate state agencies and regional offices. Nevertheless, a buffer zone may be proposed in the future to keep the visual integrity of the property.

The property management is by an inter-branch steering group. The Management Plan is in place and regular updates are planned. The property management is provided by several stakeholders on the national, regional and local levels. There is a need to reinforce the role and involvement of the local communities as well as to make sure that the property is managed in accordance with sustainability. A suitable solution would be to develop a site management system (coordinator), including a legally based competence platform, to provide on principles of the participatory management and subsidiarity a conceptual, as well as daily co-ordination of interdisciplinary interests relating to the preservation of values of the whole property.

The state-funded institution National Heritage Institute provides finances for maintenance and conservation of both country houses, their grounds and along with some minor structures forming the composition of the property. Due to the property extent and the complex structure of ownership inside the property, individual maintenance schedules have been set. Financial instruments for the conservation of the property include grant schemes and funding through the programme of the Ministry of Culture of the Czech Republic allocated to the maintenance and conservation of the immovable cultural heritage and as well as financial resources allocated from other public budgets. Municipal funds, funds from private institutions and collaborating agencies also contribute to the conservation of the property.

Since 2000, annual monitoring reports have been prepared at the national level to serve the World Heritage property manager, the Ministry of Culture, the National Heritage Institute and other agencies involved.

Links
World Heritage Journeys web site

 View photos from OUR PLACE the World Heritage collection

www.lednice.cz

Activities 1
Cultural Landscapes
News  1
UNESCO launches new travel platform ‘World Heritage Journeys’ to promote sustainable tourism in the EU
13 September 2018
Media
play_arrow Lednice-Valtice Cultural Landscape (UNESCO/NHK)
Czechia
Date of Inscription: 1996
Minor boundary modification inscribed year: 2025
Criteria: (i)(ii)(iv)
Property : 14,398.5 ha

Dossier: 763bis
Breclav District, South Moravian Region
N48 47 59.8 E16 48 12.19
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

Protections
by other conservation instruments

2 protections / 3 elements

Biosphere Reserves (1 element)

Lower Morava
RAMSAR (2 elements)

Lednické rybníky
Mokřady dolního Podyjí

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026