World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Cilento and Vallo di Diano National Park with ...
Cilento and Vallo di Diano National Park with the Archeological Sites of Paestum and Velia, and the Certosa di Padula
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Cilento and Vallo di Diano National Park with the Archeological Sites of Paestum and Velia, and the Certosa di Padula

The Cilento is an outstanding cultural landscape. The dramatic groups of sanctuaries and settlements along its three east–west mountain ridges vividly portray the area's historical evolution: it was a major route not only for trade, but also for cultural and political interaction during the prehistoric and medieval periods. The Cilento was also the boundary between the Greek colonies of Magna Graecia and the indigenous Etruscan and Lucanian peoples. The remains of two major cities from classical times, Paestum and Velia, are found there.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Cilento is a cultural landscape of outstanding value that has evidence of human occupation dating from 250,000 years ago. It has been successively occupied over time by farmers during the Neolithic period, by Bronze and Iron Age societies, Etruscans, Greek colonists, Lucanians, and was eventually incorporated into the Roman territory inthe 3rd century BC. Roman road networks replaced the earlier tracks, but after the collapse of the Western Roman Empire, these roads fell into disrepair and the ancient network was revived during the Middle Ages, as is evident in the feudal castles and religious establishments built along routes.

The site contains dramatic groups of sanctuaries and settlements extending across three different east-west mountain ridges in the province of Salerno, covering quite a vast area, 159,110ha, including part of the National Park Cilento e Vallo di Diano, the two archaeological sites of Paestum and Velia, and the monumental Certosa di Padula.

The National Park, essentially a mountainous region divided by several river valleys sloping down to the Tyrrhenian Sea, is defined by natural features: the Tyrrhenian Sea on the east, and the Sele and Tanagro rivers, with the broad sweep of the Vallo di Diano in its upper reaches.

Communication routes were established during pre-historic times along the crests of the mountain ranges, and while they fell into decline during the Roman era, they came back into use in the Middle Ages. Evidence of this use is visible in the many prehistoric and proto-historic sites discovered, and in the medieval towns and castles. The most noteworthy archaeological site is that of Paestum, the Greek city of Poseidonia, founded at the end of 7th century BC.

Another site of great importance is the archaeological area of Velia, which preserves the monumental remains of the colony of Elea, founded by the Phocaeans in the second half of the 6th century.

The Certosa di San Lorenzo at Padula in the Vallo di Diano is one of the most impressive monastic structures in the world. Its construction began in 1306, but its present Baroque form is the result of the transformations carried out in the 17th and 18th centuries. Today it is home to the Archaeological Museum of Lucanian Antiquities.

The Cilento presents an outstanding cultural landscape. The dramatic groups of sanctuaries and settlements along its three east–west mountain ridges vividly portray the area's historical evolution: it was a major route not only for trade, but also for cultural and political interaction during the prehistoric and medieval periods. The Cilento was also the boundary between the Greek colonies of Magna Graecia and the indigenous Etruscan and Lucanian peoples. The remains of two major cities from classical times, Paestum and Velia, can be found there.

Criterion (iii): During the prehistoric period, and again in the Middle Ages, the Cilento region served as a key route for cultural, political, and commercial communications in an exceptional manner, utilizing the crests of the mountain chains running east-west and thereby creating a cultural landscape of outstanding significance and quality.

Criterion (iv): In two key episodes in the development of human societies in the Mediterranean region, the Cilento area provided the only viable means of communication between the Adriatic and the Tyrrhenian seas in the central Mediterranean region, and this is vividly illustrated by the cultural landscape of today.

Integrity

The integrity of the property is intact. Within the National Park Cilento e Vallo di Diano one finds the two archaeological sites from the Greek cities of Paestum and Velia (called the Great Attractor); the monumental complex of the ancient monastery Certosa di Padula; and many sites of great archaeological and artistic relevance, such as the Lucanian settlements of Moio della Civitella, Roccagloriosa and Caselle in Pittari. The vast site also contains seaside landscapes (Punta Licosa, Palinuro, and Punta degli Infreschi) as well as inland landscapes, such as the Bulgheria mountains.

This ample stretch of land, located within a natural protected area of national importance, ensures the integrity of the site. In fact, despite the inevitable transformations in susch a vast territory, the property conserves its features as a cultural landscape, deriving from the age-old interaction between humans and nature.

Threats to the property are primarily related to natural disasters such as landslides and flooding. There is a possible threat to the integrity of the site due to illegally constructed buildings within the National Park.

Authenticity

The authenticity of the cultural elements within the park is high, providing an example of a cultural landscape of outstanding significance and quality on the Tyrrhenian Sea, with traces of human occupation dating back to pre-historic times. Vestiges of ancient mountain trail networks are still visible in the landscape, as are many of the religious sanctuaries. Villages and hamlets along the route have survived with little change impacting their authenticity.

Much restoration work has been completed in the archaeological sites of Paestum and Velia and the Certosa di San Lorenzo. In Paestum, in addition to the restoration of the three Doric temples, the restoration of the house three blocks from the Roman and the eastern sector of the city walls has been completed. Furthermore, a new section dedicated to the Museum of Prehistory and Protohistory has been opened to the public. In Velia the Roman baths and the monumental Porta Rosa have been completely restored and conserved, together with the medieval tower on the acropolis. The Certosa di Padula has been superbly restored by the competent Soprintendenza.

Protection and management requirements

The property benefits from three different levels of protection: national, regional and local.

At the national level, the site is covered by Italian Legislative Decree no 42/2004 “Code for the Cultural Heritage and Landscape”, which offers protection for natural and panoramic beauty. As a result, all interventions require the approval of the relevant national heritage organizations (municipalities and Soprintendenza for Architectonic Heritage and Landscape, a peripheral office of the Ministry for Cultural Heritage and Activities). The archaeological sites and several individual buildings in the area are also covered by Decree 42/04 as cultural heritage. This is effectively a safeguarding measure, which ensures any activity on the site must be authorized by the relevant Soprintendenza.

The archaeological site of Paestum is also under the protection regime of L. 220/1957, which established a protected landscape area extending one kilometer outside the city walls.

Parco Nazionale del Cilento e Vallo di Diano is also protected by Italian Law no 394/1991, which covers the natural areas and enforces strict controls over designated areas. A Presidential Decree of June 1995 established the Park and guaranteed the protection of both the natural environment and the heritage buildings; it also encouraged the preservation of the cultural landscape within a programme of sustainable development. It is also worth noting that much of the park is a National Forest, which comes under the strict control of the Italian Forest Law. In June 2010, the programme of the Cilento and Vallo di Diano National Park took effect, classifying a good part of the areas included in the World Heritage property as zones of “integral reserve”, within which the natural environment is conserved and its integrity ensured. The authorization of the “Ente Parco” (Park Authority) is required for all activities within the park.

The Italian catalogue of Natura 2000 sites highlights the World Heritage property within the Park, as well as vast Sites of Community Importance (S.I.C.) and Zones of Special Protection (Z.P.S.), whose safeguarding is subject to a further procedure to assess its effects, ending with the issue of a Regional Authorization, after approval by the Ente Parco.

Ownership of properties within the property is both private and public. The overall supervision for the landscape and monumental buildings is the responsibility of the above-mentioned Soprintendenza and of the Italian government’s Ministero per i Beni e le Attività Culturali.

The archaeological sites of Paestum and Elea-Velia are managed by the Soprintendenza for the Archaeological Heritage of Salerno, Avellino, Benevento and Caserta, a peripheral office of the Ministry for Cultural Heritage and Activities. The Certosa di Padula is managed by the Soprintendenza for the Architectonic and Landscape Heritage of Salerno and Avellino, another peripheral office of the Ministry for Cultural Heritage and Activities.

For the preparation of the management system, the relevant authority appointed jointly with the peripheral offices of the Ministry for Cultural Heritage and Activities (Soprintendenze) is the Parco Nazionale del Cilento e Vallo di Diano.

The World Heritage property within the park is under the park’s direct administration (in accordance with the law), under the responsibility of the Parco Nazionale del Cilento e Vallo di Diano. This is a public body, with a full-time President, Director General and professional staff; the work is supervised by a governing council, with representatives of national, regional, and local institutions and authorities, as well as a management group consisting of senior staff, consultants, and other specialists. The park is under the authority of the Ministry of the Environment. It works closely and harmoniously with the authorities of those communes that are entirely or partially within the park, which are very supportive of its work, as is the Provincial Administration of Salerno.

Each of the three distinct areas of this property is surrounded by a defined buffer zone. The total area of the three buffer zones is 178,101 hectares.

Links
Parco Nazionale del Cilento / Vallo di Diano e Alburni (in Italian)

 View photos from OUR PLACE the World Heritage collection

Informazioni turistiche e commerciali sul Cilento (only in Italian)

Il Parco Nazionale del Cilento e Vallo di Diano

Activities 1
Cultural Landscapes
News  1
UNESCO World Heritage Committee Adds 30 Sites to World Heritage List
2 December 1998
Italy
Date of Inscription: 1998
Criteria: (iii)(iv)
Property : 159,109.73 ha

Buffer zone: 178,100.98 ha
Dossier: 842
Serial: yes

Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026