World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Sangiran Early Man Site
Sangiran Early Man Site
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Assistance
Sangiran Early Man Site

Excavations here from 1936 to 1941 led to the discovery of the first hominid fossil at this site. Later, 50 fossils of Meganthropus palaeo and Pithecanthropus erectus/Homo erectus were found – half of all the world's known hominid fossils. Inhabited for the past one and a half million years, Sangiran is one of the key sites for the understanding of human evolution.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Sangiran Early Man Site is situated about 15 kilometers in the north of Solo town in Central Java, Indonesia, covering an area of 5,600 hectares. It became famous after the discovery of Homo erectus remains and associated stone artifacts (well-known as Sangiran flake industry) in the 1930s. There is a very significant geological sequence from the upper Pliocene until the end of Middle Pleistocene by depicting the human, faunal, and cultural evolutions within the last 2.4 million years. The property also yields important archaeological occupation floors dating back to the Lower Pleistocene around 1.2 million years ago. 

The macrofossils that appear abundantly from the layers provide a detailed and clear record of many faunal elements, while the property reveals more than 100 individuals of Homo erectus, dating back to at least 1.5 million years ago. These fossils show human evolution process during the Pleistocene period, particularly from 1.5 to 0.4 million years ago. Inhabited for the past one and a half million years, Sangiran is one of the key sites for the understanding of human evolution. More discoveries of stone tools have been made since. These human, fauna, and stone tool materials were deposited within its unbroken stratigrafical layers.

Criterion (iii): This property is one of the key sites for the understanding of human evolution that admirably illustrates the development of Homo sapiens sapiens, over two million years from the Lower Pleistocene to the present through the outstanding fossils (human and animal) and artefactual material that it has produced.  

Criterion (vi): The property is displaying many aspects of very long-term human physical and cultural evolution in an environmental context.  It will continue to be so and remain dynamically informative. 

Integrity 

All the potential aspects of the property such as human and animal fossils, as well as the artifacts, are found in their natural context within the boundaries of the nominated area. As normal with discoveries from open sites, the evidence is rarely found intact due to erosion and transportation processes. One has to acknowledge that these natural agents have been for long the most efficient actors in excavating Sangiran Early Man Site.  

Authenticity

This property illustrates the sequences of human, cultural, and environmental evolutions over two million years by means of the cultural materials from their original layers, which show specific periods and environments.

Protection and management requirements

In order to protect the whole property, the Ministry of Education and Culture of the Republic of Indonesia issued the decree Number 070/1977. This decree declared the Sangiran area as a nationally protected cultural site of human evolutions during Pleistocene. As for comprehensive protection such as prevention against illegal trading of the fossils and area maintenance (including zoning of the property), the goverment has published the Indonesian Law Number 5/1992 then revised to Number 11/2010. The erosion, landslide, and transportation processes on the property have been countered by continuous reforestation conducted by local government. Sand mining activity was stopped in 2008 and there is no more sand mining activity now. Since 2008, the property has been declared as National Vital Object, which means that it is protected by the Government of Indonesia and regarded as a very important site for the nation due to its significant cultural resources. The property is fully managed and regulated now by the Directorate General of Culture, Ministry of Education and Culture, due to the bureaucratic changes at the Ministry of Culture and Tourism in 2012. The government takes all stakeholders i.e. local communities, local governments, and universities, to manage the property under the supervision of the Ministry. A Master Plan and a Detail Engineering Design are established for long term management, consisting of research, protection, and public utilization.

In order to effectively maintain the property, four thematica clusters are developed, namely the Krikilan Cluster (as visitor center), Ngebung Cluster (the history of site’s discovery), Bukuran Cluster (human evolution), and Dayu Cluster (modern research). Regarding tourism management, the four clusters will be connected by means of a special tourism route. People are expected to visit all clusters which will take more than one day. A long-term property’s protection is conducted by designating the property as a National Strategic Area (in-progress), involving the local community in conservation aspects. On the other hand, the management of the property is conducted firmly and not-for-profit by a Coordinating Board, involving all the stakeholders under the direction of Directorate General of Culture, Ministry of Education and Culture.

Links
Facebook page

Official website page (in Indonesian only)

 View photos from OUR PLACE the World Heritage collection

News  1
UNESCO Jakarta supports implementation of World Heritage Camp Indonesia 2016
24 November 2016
Media
play_arrow Sangiran Early Man Site (UNESCO/NHK)
Indonesia
Date of Inscription: 1996
Criteria: (iii)(vi)
Property : 5,600 ha

Dossier: 593
Province of Central Java
S7 24 0 E110 49 0
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2018 2016 2014 2011 2009 2008 2007 2002
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026