World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Roșia Montană Mining Landscape
Roșia Montană Mining Landscape
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Roșia Montană Mining Landscape
Located in the Metalliferous range of the Apuseni Mountains in the west of Romania, Roșia Montană features the most significant, extensive and technically diverse underground Roman gold mining complex known at the time of inscription. As Alburnus Maior, it was the site of extensive gold-mining during the Roman Empire. Over 166 years starting in 106 CE, the Romans extracted some 500 tonnes of gold from the site developing highly engineered works, different types of galleries totalling 7km and a number of waterwheels in four underground localities chosen for their high-grade ore. Wax‐coated wooden writing tablets have provided detailed legal, socio‐economic, demographic and linguistic information about the Roman mining activities, not just in Alburnus Maior but also across the wider Dacian province. The site demonstrates a fusion of imported Roman mining technology with locally developed techniques, unknown elsewhere from such an early era. Mining on the site was also carried out, albeit to a lesser extent, between medieval times and the modern era. The later extractive works surround and cut across the Roman galleries. The ensemble is set in an agro-pastoral landscape which largely reflects the structures of the communities that supported the mines between the 18th and early 20th centuries.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Roșia Montană Mining Landscape contains the most significant, extensive and technically diverse underground Roman gold mining complex currently known in the world, dating from the Roman occupation of Dacia (106-271 CE). Roșia Montană is situated in a natural amphitheatre of massifs and radiating valleys in the Metalliferous range of the Apuseni Mountains, located in the historical region of Transylvania in the central part of Romania.

Roman gold mining occurred within four small mountains (Cârnic, Lety, Orlea and Cetate) that visually dominate the landscape of Roșia Montană, itself surrounded on three sides by dividing ridges and peaks. Roman archaeology in the surrounding landscape is prolific and pervasive, comprising ore-processing areas, living quarters, administrative buildings, sacred areas and necropoli, some with funerary buildings with complex architecture, all set in relation to over 7 km of ancient underground workings that have been discovered to date.

Criterion (ii): Roșia Montană Mining Landscape contains the world’s pre-eminent example of underground Roman gold mining and demonstrates an interchange of values through innovative techniques developed by skilled migrant Illyrian-Dalmatian miners to exploit gold in ways that suited the technical nature of the deposit. Multiple chambers that housed treadmill-operated water-dipping wheels for drainage represent a technique likely routed from Hispania to the Balkans, whilst perfectly carved trapezoidal-section galleries, helicoidal shafts, inclined communication galleries with stairways cut into the bedrock, and vertical extraction areas (stopes) superimposed above one another with the roof carved out in steps, are in a combination so specific to Roșia Montană that they likely represent pioneering aspects in the technical history of mining.

Criterion (iii): Roșia Montană Mining Landscape embodies the cultural traditions of one of the oldest documented mining communities in Europe, anciently founded by the Romans, as manifested in extant underground mining works, chronologically differentiated by distinctive technical features; and a socio‐technical mining landscape consisting of ore‐processing areas, habitation areas, sacred places and necropoli. The interpretation of its history is enriched by Roman wax‐coated wooden writing tablets discovered in the mines during the 18th and 19th centuries. Together with prolific stone epigraphic monuments, they provide an authentic picture of daily life and cultural practice in this ancient frontier mining community. 

Combined with outcomes of recent, intensive and systematic archaeological investigation, an exceptional reflection of Roman mining practices has emerged. 

Criterion (iv): Roșia Montană Mining Landscape illustrates the strategic control and vigorous development of precious metals’ mining by the Roman Empire, essential for its longevity and military power. Following the decline of mining in Hispania, Roșia Montană located in Aurariae Dacicae (Roman Dacia) was the only significant new source of gold and silver for the Roman Empire, among the likely key motivations for Trajan’s conquest.

Integrity

Roșia Montană contains all the elements necessary to express the values of the property for the Roman mining period. The property is of adequate size to ensure the complete representation of the features and processes which convey its significance. Moreover, the property comprises an area in which future archaeological research will probably discover a large number of further surface and underground mining, ore processing and settlement sites of the Roman period. However, the current mining proposal means that the integrity of the property is highly vulnerable.

Authenticity

The property contains attributes that are high in authenticity in terms of the location and the form and materials of surviving historic features, with a clear sense of how, when and by whom mining shaped the land. In terms of knowledge, epigraphic and documentary evidence combined with a decade of intensive systematic archaeological investigation has provided a major contribution to the understanding of Roman mining techniques and organisation. There is considerable potential for future research and for new discoveries related to many periods of the region’s mining history. However, the current mining proposal means that the authenticity of the property is highly vulnerable.

Protection and management requirements

Roșia Montană Mining Landscape is legally protected in accordance with Romanian law as a World Heritage property.

The protection of Roșia Montană is supported by listing under the Law for the protection of historic monuments (L. 422/2001) which allows for the development of urban planning measures. Currently there are no planning controls in place and these need to be urgently developed. Currently there are active mining licences on the property and inadequate controls to stop these being extended. To activate these, permits need to be approved. There is clearly a need for the development of a General Urban Plan (Plan Urbanistic General) and a Zonal Urban Plan (Plan Urbanistic Zonal) to restrict approvals for mining permits.

The management plan for the property is being finalized by the National Institute of Heritage who is also responsible for the monitoring of the property. The management plan should be augmented by an internationally supported conservation plan and a tourism strategy should be implemented.

Links
National Heritage Institute of Romania (in Romanian only)

Adopt a House Programme

Roșia Montană în Patrimoniul Mondial UNESCO

Activities 2
Cultural Landscapes
Culture|2030 Indicators National Profile of Romania
News  1
Cultural sites in Africa, Arab Region, Asia, Europe, and Latin America inscribed on UNESCO’s World Heritage List
27 July 2021
Romania
Date of Inscription: 2021
Criteria: (ii)(iii)(iv)
Buffer zone: 341.42 ha
Dossier: 1552rev
N46 18 22 E23 7 50
List of World Heritage in Danger

Inscription Year on the List of World Heritage in Danger

2021 - Present
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2025 2024 2023
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026