World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Ensemble of the Ferapontov Monastery
Ensemble of the Ferapontov Monastery
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Ensemble of the Ferapontov Monastery

The Ferapontov Monastery, in the Vologda region in northern Russia, is an exceptionally well-preserved and complete example of a Russian Orthodox monastic complex of the 15th-17th centuries, a period of great significance in the development of the unified Russian state and its culture. The architecture of the monastery is outstanding in its inventiveness and purity. The interior is graced by the magnificent wall paintings of Dionisy, the greatest Russian artist of the end of the 15th century.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The Ensemble of Ferrapontov Monastery is situated in the Vologda region, in the north-western part of the Russian Federation on a small hill, between Borodaevskoe and Paskoe lakes, 120 km northwest of the city of Vologda.

The Moscow monk Ferrapont founded the monastery in 1398. The Ensemble of the Monastery was formed in the 15th-17th centuries. The core of the Ensemble is the Cathedral of the Nativity of the Virgin (1490), which is especially remarkable among the six surviving buildings of the Monastery. The others are the Church of the Annunciation, with a refectory chamber, the Treasury Chamber, the St. Martinian Church, the Churches of Epiphany and St. Pherapont above the Holy Gate, and the Bell Tower. In the 19th century the monastery territory was enclosed with a stone fence.

The history of Ferrapontov Monastery was linked with important events at some crucial points during the conformation of the centralized Russian state, such as the approval authority of the first "Emperor of All Russia" Ivan III, the reign of the first Russian tsar Ivan IV and the exile of Patriarch Nikon. In the 15th-16th centuries, Ferrapontov Monastery became a major cultural and ideological centre of the region, and was one of the main monasteries that considerably influenced the policy of Muscovy.

The architecture of the monastery, a remarkable example of the Rostov architectural style, is outstanding in its inventiveness and purity. The buildings of the monastery retained all the characteristic features and interior decoration. The Ensemble of the Ferrapontov Monastery is also a vivid example of the harmonious unity with the natural surrounding landscape that has changed little from the 17th century, emphasizing the unique spiritual system of northern monks, while at the same time revealing features of economic structure of northern peasantry.

The murals of the Cathedral of the Nativity of the Virgin have a special significance for Russian culture and other cultures worldwide. The murals of the Cathedral are the only paintings of the greatest Russian master Dionisy the Wise, which have been entirely preserved to this day in their original form. The Ensemble of the Ferrapontov Monastery, with the most valuable and completely preserved frescos of Dionisy, is a unique example of the integrity and unity of the Russian style of the northern monastery ensemble of the 15th-17th centuries.

Criterion (i): The wall paintings of Dionisy in the Cathedral of the Nativity of the Virgin at Ferrapontov Monastery are the highest expression of Russian mural art in the 15th-16th centuries.

Criterion (iv): The complex of Ferrapontov Monastery is the purest and most complete example of an Orthodox monastic community from the 15th-17th centuries, a crucial period in the cultural and spiritual development of Russia.

Integrity

The inscribed property encompasses 2.10 ha, with a buffer zone of 20 ha and contains all the attributes that convey its Outstanding Universal Value. The integrity of the Ensemble of Ferrapontov Monastery and the good conservation of all its attributes are ensured by the boundaries of the property, which have remained unchanged and are clearly delineated by a the stone wall that surrounds all the architectural monuments and constructions of the Monastery. None of the attributes are threatened by contemporary development, deterioration or neglect.

The landscape around the monastery has remained almost unchanged for centuries, and has preserved its harmonious unity. Thanks to its location and compactness, the expressive silhouette of the monastery can easily be viewed from different directions, and all natural and anthropogenic impacts on the property have been avoided.

Authenticity

The Ensemble, erected in the 15th-17th centuries, has preserved a high level of authenticity in terms of its original layout, form, materials and techniques, its design, as well as its old architectural appearance, notably with regard to the interiors. Given its good preservation, the Monastery has not required large-scale reconstruction. Certain original architectural forms and structures were reconstructed on the basis of scientific studies and using traditional materials: large size brick stones for walls, wood for joints, fillings and for roof constructions. There are no modern buildings or constructions on the territory of the monastery.

Conservation works on the wall paintings have been especially commendable, being restricted to consolidation and cleaning. The authenticity of the frescos by Dionisy is determined on the basis of the absence of any interference in structure. Unique methods of conservation of the layers of the cathedral’s paintings ensured that there would be only negligible interferences with the artist’s paintings and no violation of their structure or aesthetic perception.

Today, the monastery houses the state museum. However, changes in the authenticity of function are part of the history of the property, and the addition of the museum plays an indispensable role in the protection of the authenticity of the ensemble. The Russian Orthodox Church uses the Churches of St. Pherapont and St. Epiphany as parish churches, and services are also foreseen at the Church of St. Martinian.

Protection and management requirements

According to the Decree of the President of the Russian Federation of 02.04.1997, No. 275, the Ensemble of the Ferrapontov Monastery is declared as a monument of history and culture of federal significance. The Museum of the Frescoes of Dionisy in the Ferrapontov Monastery is a branch of the Kirillo-Belozersky historical architectural and art museum reserve. Since 1998, the Ministry of Culture of the Russian Federation is responsible for financing and running the museum. At present, the Museum is under control of the Department of Cultural Heritage of the Ministry and the Department of Control, Supervision and Licensing in the Sphere of Cultural Heritage. In 2011, the Conciliatory Commission, consisting of representatives of Vologda Eparchy of the Russian Orthodox Church and the Museum, was created to address the management and conservation of the cultural heritage monuments of the Monastery. The state of conservation of the property is also under monitoring by the National Commission of the Russian Federation for UNESCO.

Conservation challenges to be addressed include the continued preservation of the unique frescoes by Dionisy, the preservation of the ensemble of the monastery, as well as the sustainable monitoring of the state of conservation of the property and the monitoring and enforcement of buffer zone regulations.

Links
Kirmuseum

News  1
World Heritage Committee Inscribes 61 New Sites on World Heritage List
30 November 2000
Russian Federation
Date of Inscription: 2000
Criteria: (i)(iv)
Property : 2.1 ha

Buffer zone: 20 ha
Dossier: 982
Vologda region
N59 57 0 E38 34 0
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2013 2011 2010
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026