World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Archaeological Zone of Paquimé, Casas Grandes
Archaeological Zone of Paquimé, Casas Grandes
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Assistance
Archaeological Zone of Paquimé, Casas Grandes

Paquimé, Casas Grandes, which reached its apogee in the 14th and 15th centuries, played a key role in trade and cultural contacts between the Pueblo culture of the south-western United States and northern Mexico and the more advanced civilizations of Mesoamerica. The extensive remains, only part of which have been excavated, are clear evidence of the vitality of a culture which was perfectly adapted to its physical and economic environment, but which suddenly vanished at the time of the Spanish Conquest.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief Synthesis

The archaeological zone of Paquimé is located in the Municipality of Casas Grandes, Chihuahua, Mexico. It is located at the foot of the Sierra Madre Occidental range near the headwaters of the Casas Grandes River. It is estimated to contain the remains of some 2,000 rooms in clusters of living rooms, workshops and stores, with patios. The predominant building material is unfired clay (adobe); stone is used for specific purposes, such as the lining of pits, a technique from central Mexico. The archaeological zone is distinguished by its impressive buildings in earthen architecture, mostly residential building structures that originally must have been several stories high and the remains of ceremonial monuments which have earthen architecture with masonry coatings. There are remains from of hundreds of rooms, with doors in a "T" shape and the prehispanic site still maintains its original planning on three axes: axis of housing units, the axis of squares, and the axis of ceremonial buildings.

It is the largest archaeological zone that represents the peoples and cultures of the Chihuahua Desert. Its development took place in the years 700-1475 and it reached its apogee in the 14th and 15th centuries. Its architecture marked an epoch in the development of the architecture of the human settlement of a vast region in Mexico and illustrated an outstanding example of the organization of space in architecture. Paquimé played a key role in trade and cultural contacts between the Pueblo culture of the south-western United States and northern Mexico and the more advanced civilizations of Mesoamerica. The extensive remains, only part of which have been excavated, are clear evidence of the vitality of a culture which was perfectly adapted to its physical and economic environment,

Criterion (iii) : Paquimé, Casas Grandes, bears eloquent and abundant testimony to an important element in the cultural evolution of North America, and in particular to prehispanic commercial and cultural links.

Criterion (iv) : The extensive remains of the archaeological site of Paquimé, Casas Grandes, provide exceptional evidence of the development of adobe architecture in North America, and in particular of the blending of this with the more advanced techniques of Mesoamerica.

Integrity

The inscribed property, 146 hectares, contains the most significant archaeological remains to convey the Outstanding Universal Value of the property. As the site has remained largely unexcavated, there is still a high degree of material integrity. Conservation and maintenance interventions have maintained the attributes of the property and there are currently no large threats derived from development.

Authenticity

Preserved and protected as an exceptional archaeological zone, the changes in its appearance had been prevented as well as and any major reconstruction activity. The site is undoubtedly a major archaeological reserve and maintains a high degree of authenticity.

Conservation work is mainly limited to re-rendering the original walls with earthen materials, with the same nature and properties as the original, to maintain its physical integrity and leave a sacrificial layer exposed to weathering and subsequent decay.

The factors underpinning the authenticity of Paquimé are also linked to the characteristics and attributes of the cultural environment of the peoples of the Grande and Colorado rivers regions. These ties are manifested in Paquimé in the magnificence of the constructions, in the shapes of the buildings, its architectural finishes including the famous design form of “T” and facades with porticos

Protection and management requirements

The provisions for the protection and management of the archaeological zone are supported in the legal framework provided by the 1972 Federal Law on Historic, Archaeological and Artistic Monuments and Zones. The Archaeological Monuments Zone of Paquimé was created by Presidential Decree on 2 December 1992. The decree identified the boundaries and a buffer zone between the archaeological zone and the neighbouring town of Casas Grandes. The buffer zone is protected through the urban development plan.

The area protected by the decree has also been integrated in the records of the Declaration of Area Landmarks and Urban Development Plan Casas Grandes Chihuahua and the Public Registry of Property at the Casas Grandes Municipality in Chihuahua.

The property is managed by the National Institute of Anthropology and History (INAH), through its regional office in Chihuahua, in collaboration with state and municipal governments. INAH has human resources for the implementation of site management and museum activities geared towards the conservation of the site.

The institute provide the funds for the operation of the site and the development of research and education, but these funds are limited, which causes delays in the implementation of conservation and management actions. These shortcomings are reflected in the needs for facilities both at the site and the museum, the maintenance of the perimeter, among others. Additional elements that have yet to be addressed are archaeological materials warehouses, a special library and research facilities.

The management and conservation of the property will need to promote education and outreach, particularly children's workshops, the production of workbooks for children of different ages, public lectures on the topics of culture. Efforts will also need to be focused on presentation and interpretation and in fostering the scientific value of the property through systematic research, the creation of specialised facilities regarding the Paquimé culture and the conservation of earthen architecture. Work on supporting national and international workshops on the conservation of earthen architecture should also be continued.

Links
Instituto Nacional de Antropología e Historia's website page (in Spanish only)

Activities 2
World Heritage Earthen Architecture Programme (WHEAP)
Culture|2030 Indicators National Profile of the Mexico
News  1
UNESCO World Heritage Committee Adds 30 Sites to World Heritage List
2 December 1998
Media
play_arrow Archaeological Zone of Paquimé, Casas Grandes (UNESCO/NHK)
Mexico
Date of Inscription: 1998
Criteria: (iii)(iv)
Property : 146.72 ha

Dossier: 560rev
Municipality of Casas Grandes, State of Chihuahua
N30 22 1.661 W107 56 53.239
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
Protections
by other conservation instruments

2 protections / 2 elements

1954 Hague Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict (1 element)

Paquimé archeological zone, Casas Grandes (Municipality of Casas Grandes, State of Chihuahua)
2003 Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage (1 element)

Bolero: identity, emotion and poetry turned into song

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026