World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Funerary and memory sites of the First World ...
Funerary and memory sites of the First World War (Western Front)
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Funerary and memory sites of the First World War (Western Front)
All along the Western Front of the First World War, which stretched for some 700 km from the North Sea to the Franco-Swiss border, a series of 139 funerary and memorial sites bear witness to the common desire of the various parties involved in the conflict to honour their children who fell in battle. This objective takes the form of individual graves and/or memorials listing the names of the missing. Places dedicated to meditation, remembrance and tributes are specially created. Beyond the diversity in size, location and design, there is a clear desire to create spaces that are worthy of the sacrifice made. This is reflected in the choice of noble materials, as well as in calls for renowned architects, botanists, landscape architects and artists to design sites of exceptional architectural, artistic and landscape quality. These sites are visited daily by pilgrims, individual visitors, official delegations, school groups, local community representatives and descendants. They bear witness to funerary and memorial practices that are still relevant today, as remains discovered by chance or during archaeological excavations are still buried there with all honours. These commemorative sites represent a heritage that almost literally belongs to the whole world, spreading a message of reconciliation that is still very topical.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The transnational serial property “Funerary and memory sites of the First World War (Western Front)” comprises 139 component parts spread across the Western Front, the decisive front that was active throughout the First World War (1914-1918). Soldiers from all over the world (from more than 130 present-day countries) fought or stood side by side. Located on or near the battlefields, the component parts of this series include various types of cemeteries, such as battlefields, hospitals, assembly, and their surroundings, often associated with memorials. They are representative of all the international military memorial and funerary forms present in France and Belgium.

The serial property conveys the immense trauma experienced by societies in the early 20th century and the mourning of survivors and their families on an international scale. It bears witness to a new kind of war, industrialized, that mobilized millions of men and women around the world. On the Western Front alone, more than two million men were buried in cemeteries and necropolises, with several hundred thousand more missing or unidentified. The vast majority had been conscripted into national armies through a draft system that tore apart families and entire communities. Added to these were the civilians killed during offensives, as well as labourers, many of whom came from colonial territories.

For the first time in history, a new approach to handling the deaths of soldiers was implemented, one that would become the standard. It is based on the identification of the dead, whenever possible, and the individualization of their graves, meant to be systematic and reciprocal, regardless of the dead soldier’s origin, rank, nationality, culture, social class, or philosophical or religious beliefs. These practices were first carried out by the comrades of the fallen, when circumstances allowed, and by local civilians, before being institutionalized by the States. The fundamental principle of equal treatment for all the deceased was implemented through new structures created during the war to meet the needs of commemoration. This approach was formalized by the 1929 Geneva Convention, signed by 47 States.

The funerary and memory sites are permanent and form a remarkable architectural ensemble, reflecting both national and transnational aesthetic models. Mourning is expressed through architecture, decorative elements, landscaping, and spatial design, each representing the diverse cultures from around the world that were involved in the fighting on the Western Front. For over a century, this ensemble has served as the site of commemorations that remain a living tradition. Reflecting geopolitical shifts, identities, and the cultures of many peoples, these commemorations today engage both local communities and populations from around the world. This tradition fosters educational and international exchanges in the form of intergenerational dialogue. As markers of the war that initiated the cycle of 20th-century violence, the funerary and memory sites have become places of transmission and awareness. As sites of memory and reflection for humanity, they contribute to reconciliation and to the pursuit of an ideal of peace.

Criterion (iii): The serial property bears witness to the institutionalization and widespread adoption of a transnational approach to the treatment of the dead, which gave rise to a new form of humanitarian law: the identification and burial of those killed in war in individual graves.

For the first time in history, every victim of the conflict was, in principle, buried and acknowledged as an individual, on a universal scale and without distinction of nationality, social status, ethnicity, or religion. This practice was carried out reciprocally by all the warring parties. The individual who died in combat is acknowledged as a person in their own right, with respect for their religious or philosophical beliefs.

The name of each deceased is inscribed on their grave, if identified, or on a memorial if their identity is unknown. Individual graves are mostly grouped within military cemeteries. Ossuaries hold the remains of unidentified soldiers. Monuments to the missing are erected for those who have no identified individual grave. The names of the missing are engraved in alphabetical lists.

This individual and equal recognition of all victims became a common practice and the legal norm for conflicts following the First World War.

Criterion (iv): The ensemble of funerary and memory sites of the First World War (Western Front) provides an exceptional illustration of the First World War and its consequences, an era of profound significance in human history. The serial property reflects the creation of new models, as well as architectural, landscape, and artistic works born from the desire to remember all those who died in the war, to pay tribute to them, and to restore a sense of human dignity. The component parts of the series were created and organized by all the belligerent nations, each expressing their own cultural sensibilities and national styles. Consistent attention to aesthetics and the surrounding environment is a defining feature.

Through their scale and number, the sites reflect the unprecedented level of destruction brought about by a war that was, for the first time, total and global. By their location, generally near major battle sites and often accompanied by elements that directly bear witness to the conflict, they form a commemorative landscape. This typology of war cemeteries, ossuaries, and memorials has served as a model in subsequent conflicts.

Criterion (vi): This extensive and coherent series is tangibly and directly associated with the scope, scale, and global consequences of the First World War, which made it an exceptional event of worldwide significance. Together, these funerary and memory sites, erected across a vast yet clearly defined territory, bear witness to a tradition that remains alive, initiated even before the conflict ended. They reflect the multitude and diversity of soldiers who died in the war and the countries they represented. 

In the face of the inhumanity of war, they embody a shared commitment to preserving the individual identity of its victims and to rehumanizing the traumatized societies left in its wake. Through their design and layout, they highlight the values of equality and human dignity. 

More than a century later, millions of visitors of all generations from around the world still visit these sites as a form of remembrance and pilgrimage. Alongside local residents, they take part in commemorations, whether institutional or organized by associations, at international, national, local, or personal levels.

Integrity

The series presents a selection of the most emblematic funerary and memory sites representing this new cult of honouring those who died in the war on the Western Front of the First World War (France–Belgium), drawn from a wider set of several thousand cemeteries and monuments.

It reflects the memory of the nations and peoples who took part in the fighting and bears witness to the extraordinary diversity of the belligerents, fully justifying the term “First World War”. Through its component parts, the series presents a comprehensive representation of the nations and peoples involved in the conflict.

The component parts of the series reflect the cultural diversity of the various belligerents and illustrate the full range of architectural, decorative, and landscape styles, shaped both by the diversity of those who created them and by the historical evolution of cemeteries and memorials over time. It thus conveys the stylistic and typological diversity of funerary and commemorative works.

The series is grounded in the different zones of the Western Front and the various phases of the war’s history. The geographical distribution of the property’s component parts expresses this dual spatial and chronological balance. The series respects and illustrates the historical extent of the Western Front.

Finally, it embodies a commemorative tradition that has evolved over time and continues to be actively observed on a large scale today. The proposed series takes into account these different temporal dimensions in the construction of the sites, as well as their current cultural and symbolic significance.

Each component part of the serial property individually demonstrates strong structural integrity, whether as a memorial, necropolis, organized military cemetery, or monument. Almost all of them were conceived from the outset as coherent monumental and landscaped ensembles, whose structure and design reflect a deliberate intention to create places of remembrance. Their construction followed the conventions of a funerary art shaped both by the cultural context of the interwar period and by the deep cultural and emotional weight of war memory. Plant elements (lawns, trees, and ornamental plantings) are designed to visually enhance the monumental or territorial components. All the component parts possess deep symbolic significance, which continues to be felt today. In and of themselves, the component parts of the series embody a high degree of integrity in preserving intangible heritage and ensuring its transmission across generations, especially since the passing of the last eyewitnesses of the First World War.

Authenticity

The series consists of a group of cemeteries and memorials designed to fulfil a funerary and memorial function that has been carefully preserved to this day. They are complementary sites of memory, each linked to specific events of the First World War. These funerary and memorial sites have been preserved and maintained in accordance with their original purpose.

Created during the war itself, the cemeteries and individual graves bear witness to the widespread adoption of a new form of commemoration for those who died in combat. After the Armistice, the systematic search for the dead, their identification, and the concentration of remains led to the organization of cemeteries and necropolises, as well as ossuaries for unidentified human remains.

The construction of war memorials dedicated to the conflict and its dead developed not only near the former front lines, but also in villages and cities further away. The most prominent memorial monuments, which form part of the series, provide both a visual and symbolic rhythm along the former front and across the broader landscape.

Some wartime cemeteries had their remains exhumed, but their memorial function was preserved, giving a few of them an archaeological dimension. Certain cemeteries were affected by events during the Second World War, and some were reorganized afterward, yet always in keeping with their original funerary purpose. Often associated with cemeteries, the funerary monuments, typically bearing long lists of the deceased, have followed a parallel historical trajectory. Some of these were created during the war itself, but most were designed during the interwar period, directly linked to the commemoration of those who died in combat. They are therefore individual material testimonies that offer a high degree of authenticity in reflecting the new, widespread cult of honouring those who died in combat, and they have maintained their role as places of remembrance.

In conclusion, the sites forming the component parts of the series generally demonstrate a high level of maintenance and preservation, in keeping with their material authenticity and symbolic value. The serial property powerfully conveys the authentic and enduring nature of the commemoration of those who died in combat, recognized as individuals.

Protection and management requirements

The sites that make up the series are located across the territories of two States (Belgium and France) each with its own heritage protection regulations and legislation (Wallonia, Flanders, France).

All of the sites included in the property are subject to protective measures. To this end, each partner applies its respective legal frameworks. The Belgian partners (Flanders and Wallonia) have chosen to systematically apply heritage legislation by classifying all of the sites. This classification serves both as recognition of their heritage value and as a protection tool.

In Wallonia, the sites in question are designated either as protected sites or, in some cases, as monuments. The buffer zone is generally covered by another heritage protection mechanism known as the “protection zone”, which functions in a manner similar to a buffer zone. In two cases, the heritage value of the surrounding area has led to the buffer zone itself being designated as a protected site.

In Flanders, all the sites that form part of the series are classified as monuments. The buffer zones are supported by heritage or urban planning tools.

In France, the sites in the series are subject to legal protection of a heritage nature (listing or nomination as historic monuments), or are located near historic monuments or remarkable heritage sites. They may also be protected for environmental reasons (such as site listings or inclusion in state-owned forests) or under urban planning regulations (Local Urban Plan).

In both Belgium and France, the vast majority of national and international military cemeteries and memorials hold the status of inalienable public property.

The management of the serial property prioritizes the conservation of its component sites, the preservation of the Outstanding Universal Value and the attributes on which it is based, through a common and shared approach while respecting the specific characteristics of each component part. The continuation of commemorative practices within a context conducive to reflection is also at the heart of the management of the serial property. These practices follow in the tradition of the cult of the dead that emerged from the First World War, focused on the commemoration of each individual, including the identification and burial procedures in the event of the accidental discovery of remains related to combat. Communicating and sharing this Outstanding Universal Value with the widest possible audience, both local communities and international visitors, is another key aspect of the management strategy.

Furthermore, the maintenance, management, and conservation of most of these sites fall under the responsibility of specific organizations established during or shortly after the war by the main belligerents (ABMC, CWGC, ONaCVG, VDK, WHI). These entities have their own management and maintenance programmes, which are based in particular on international cooperation agreements, and they organize meetings and exchanges of best practices. In addition, they are committed to preserving the memory of those who died in the war by encouraging and supporting visits from individuals and school groups through narrative, educational, and interpretive initiatives.

The management plan therefore takes this complexity into account, incorporates existing cooperation, and aims to expand collaboration for the benefit of all the component parts of the property. It is based on a structure that brings together representatives of the States supporting the project (Belgium, through Wallonia and Flanders, and France) and the site managers.

The management plan is implemented at various levels (transnational, national, regional, and local) in order to reflect the legal frameworks and practices of each context. It is intended to serve as a strategic tool to manage the evolution of the sites and their surroundings, to ensure that the sites remain rooted in their territories, and to encourage the involvement of local communities.

Belgium
France
Date of Inscription: 2023
Criteria: (iii)(iv)(vi)
Property : 879.91 ha

Buffer zone: 30,061.22 ha
Dossier: 1567rev
Serial: yes

Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2025
Protections
by other conservation instruments

2 protections / 4 elements

Biosphere Reserves (1 element)

Moselle Sud
RAMSAR (3 elements)

Etangs de la Champagne humide
Vallée de la Haute-Sûre
Vallée de la Haute-Sûre

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heri