World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Historic Centre of Shakhrisyabz
Historic Centre of Shakhrisyabz
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Assistance
Historic Centre of Shakhrisyabz

The historic centre of Shakhrisyabz contains a collection of exceptional monuments and ancient quarters which bear witness to the city's secular development, and particularly to the period of its apogee, under the rule of Amir Temur and the Temurids, in the 15th-16th century.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The Historic Centre of Shakhrisyabz, located on the Silk Roads in southern Uzbekistan, is over 2000 years old and was the cultural and political centre of the Kesh region in the 14th and 15th century.

A collection of exceptional monuments and ancient quarters can be found within the medieval walls, parts of which still remain. The Historic Centre of Shakhrisabz bears witness to the city’s secular development and to centuries of its history, and particularly to the period of its apogee, under the empire of Temur, in the 15th century. Construction of elements continued in Shakhrisyabz throughout different time periods, lending a unique character to the place by the succession of different architectural styles. Despite the inroads of time, the remaining vestiges are still impressive in the harmony and strength of styles, an enriching addition to the architectural heritage of Central Asia and the Islamic world.

The Ak-Sarai Palace construction began in 1380, the year following Temur's conquest of Khorezm, whose artisans were deported to work on the palace and provide its rich decoration. Although Samarkand may boast a great many Temurid monuments, not one can rival the Ak-Sarai Palace in Shakhrisyabz. The foundations of its immense gate have been preserved: this architectural masterpiece is outstanding in its dimensions and bold design.

The Dorus Saodat is a vast complex which was destined as a place of burial for the ruling family and contained, in addition to the tombs themselves, a prayer hall, a mosque, and accommodation for the religious community and pilgrims. The main façade was faced with white marble. The tomb of Temur, also of white marble, is a masterpiece of the architecture of this period and it is also one of the finest memorials to be found in Central Asia.

The covered Chor-su bazaar was built at the cross-roads of two main streets, in the form of an octagon with a central cupola, with no particular decoration but with an eye to the exterior effect of bold architecture. The baths, rebuilt on the site of the 15th century baths and still in use today, are heated by an elaborate network of underground conduits.

Shakhrisyabz contains not only outstanding monuments dating from the period of the Temurids, but also mosques, mausoleums, and entire quarters of ancient houses.

In addition to these monuments, the town also offers a variety of interesting constructions of a more modern period, including the Mirhamid, Chubin, Kunduzar, and Kunchibar mosques. Period houses reflect a more popular architectural style, with rooms typically laid out around a courtyard with veranda.

Criterion (iii): Shakhrisyabz contains many fine monuments, and in particular those from the Temurid period, which was of great cultural and political significance in medieval Central Asia.

Criterion (iv): The buildings of Shakhrisyabz, notably the Ak-Sarai Palace and the Tomb of Temur, are outstanding examples of a style which had a profound influence on the architecture of this region.

Integrity

All the original components of the medieval town including the unique architectural monuments and traditional houses built during the Temurid period are located within the boundaries of the property which is defined by the alignment of the city walls. The historic urban fabric of the town is intact, despite some insensitive insertions made during the Soviet period.

The main factor affecting the physical integrity of monuments is the rising ground water level. Therefore a drainage system is required around the historical area.

Authenticity

The monuments and buildings of Shakhrisabz are a testimony to the architecture and city planning of the Temurid period. The historic centre has retained its original appearance. Most of the buildings and decorative art have been well preserved and are in their original state and care has been taken in restoration works to ensure the use of traditional materials and techniques.

Protection and management requirements

The Historic Centre of Shakhrisyabz was designated as a “Monument of Significance for the Republic” in 1973. The town was entered on the List of Historic Towns under Resolution N°339 of the Council of Ministers of Uzbekistan in 1973.

The relevant legislation of the Republic of Uzbekistan provides sufficient protection for the property and regulates the new urban developments in the historical centre. The property is managed by the Regional Inspection for Protection and Utilization of Cultural Heritage Sites under the Ministry of Culture and Sports with participation of regional authorities.

Monitoring of the monuments is being carried out once or twice a year by the Tashkent State Institute of Architecture and Construction. The main monuments are in good conditions and the income from leased spaces provides the funds for the management of the property. Extra funds would be required from the state for restoration projects such as that of the city walls.

It is necessary to develop a comprehensive conservation and management plan in order to ensure the long-term safeguarding of the property.

Links
 View photos from OUR PLACE the World Heritage collection

Activities 2
World Heritage Earthen Architecture Programme (WHEAP)
World Heritage Cities Programme
News  4
The World Heritage Centre Dispatches High-Level Reactive Monitoring Mission to Shakhrisyabz (Uzbekistan)
21 January 2019
Polish city of Kraków to host 2017 World Heritage Committee session
17 July 2016
Historic Centre of Shakhrisyabz, Uzbekistan, added to List of World Heritage in Danger
13 July 2016
World Heritage Committee Inscribes 61 New Sites on World Heritage List
30 November 2000
Uzbekistan
Date of Inscription: 2000
Criteria: (iii)(iv)
Property : 240 ha

Buffer zone: 82 ha
Dossier: 885
Kashkadarya region
N39 2 60 E66 49 59.988
List of World Heritage in Danger

Inscription Year on the List of World Heritage in Danger

2016 - Present
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2025 2024 2023 2021 2019 2018 2017 2016 2015 2007 2006 2005 2004 2003
Protections
by other conservation instruments

1 protection / 3 elements

2003 Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage (3 elements)

Art of miniature
Ceramic arts in Uzbekistan
Shashmaqom music

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026