World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Water Management System of Augsburg
Water Management System of Augsburg
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Water Management System of Augsburg

The water management system of the city of Augsburg has evolved in successive phases from the 14th century to the present day. It includes a network of canals, water towers dating from the 15th to 17th centuries, which housed pumping machinery, a water-cooled butchers’ hall, a system of three monumental fountains and hydroelectric power stations, which continue to provide sustainable energy today. The technological innovations generated by this water management system have helped establish Augsburg as a pioneer in hydraulic engineering.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The Water Management System of Augsburg is a sustainable system of water management that evolved in successive phases through the City’s application of innovative hydraulic engineering, demonstrating an exemplary use of water resources over the course of more than seven centuries.

It represents an urban water landscape that is unparalleled in terms of its surviving successive technical diversity. The system includes: the sources of both potable and process water (spring water and river water, respectively) and their network of canals and complex of watercourses that kept the two types of water in strict separation throughout the system; water towers from the 15th to 17th century that housed pumping machinery driven by water wheels and later by turbines to counter the abrupt topographical change presented by the plateau that hosts the historic city centre of Augsburg; a water-cooled butchers’ hall from the early 17th century; a system of three monumental fountains of extraordinary artistic quality; Hochablass Waterworks that represents modern cutting-edge hydraulic engineering of the late-19th century; hydropower stations, and finally the hydroelectric power stations that continue to provide sustainable power.

Criterion (ii): The Water Management System of Augsburg has generated significant technological innovations, which sustained Augsburg’s leading position as a pioneer in hydraulic engineering. The strict separation between drinking and process water was introduced as early as 1545, long before research into hygiene matters established as a fact that impure water was the reason for many diseases. An international exchange of ideas regarding water supply and water generation evolved which, in turn, inspired local engineers in their drive for innovations many of which were tested and implemented in Augsburg for the first time.

Criterion (iv): The Water Management System of Augsburg illustrates the use of water resources and the production of highly pure water as the basis for the continual growth of a city and its prosperity since the Middle Age. The architectural and technological monuments preserve successive socio-technical ensembles that are vivid testimony to the City’s urban administration and management of water that brought pre-eminence in two key stages in human history: the water “art” of the Renaissance, and the Industrial Revolution.

Integrity

The integrity of the Water Management System of Augsburg is based on the functional unity and the wholeness of an integrated group of 22 mutually dependent elements, expressed in six typologies of structures that are a testimony to the city’s long and continuous management of its water system. The technical-architectural ensemble constituting the system is of adequate size and fully represents the features and processes, which lend the property its importance.

The integrity of the property refers to an asset that in its current state is the product of a long succession of adaptations, modifications and substitutions over more than 700 years.

Authenticity

The Water Management System of Augsburg is an exceptional preserved structures that document the development of an urban water management system since medieval times. The system function is based on the preserved ensemble of water management features such as canals, water courses, waterworks for the production of drinking water, hydro-technical structures and buildings, a triad of fountains of extraordinary artistic quality, a water-cooled meat cutting, processing and sales facility and a range of hydropower plants.

Management and protection requirements

All 22 elements of the Water Management System of Augsburg have been included in the Bavarian heritage list. They are protected by law in accordance with the Bavarian Heritage Protection Act. All the important upkeep or change measures and all construction interventions are to be coordinated with the Lower Heritage Protection Authority of the City of Augsburg and require approval in accordance with heritage protection law. Large parts of the property lie in conservation and FFH (Flora-Fauna-Habitats) areas or within the existing heritage protection areas ‘Ensemble Old Town Augsburg’ and ‘Olympic Canoe Course’. This provides extra protection for the property, as strict regulations exist for water quality control and nature conservation in addition to building and heritage preservation. The protection, sustainable use, development and design quality of the property and its setting are also ensured by various ordinances, master plans and guidelines elaborated by the City of Augsburg. Buffer zones have been designated and mapped however protective measures in the wider setting of the property should be reinforced.

A World Heritage Office is responsible for coordinating and ensuring the preservation and proper management of the property. Among other responsibilities, it checks any projects and planned constructions against compatibility with the World Heritage standards and takes care of the regular review of the general state of conservation of the property. A Management Plan has been compiled to define the framework of the future management of the property.

Links
Deutsche UNESCO-Kommission

Instagram page

Facebook page

Water Management System of Augsburg (in German and English)

Activities 1
World Heritage Cities Programme
News  1
Seven more cultural sites added to UNESCO’s World Heritage List
6 July 2019
Germany
Date of Inscription: 2019
Criteria: (ii)(iv)
Property : 112.83 ha

Buffer zone: 3,204.23 ha
Dossier: 1580
N48 21 55.7 E10 54 7.2
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026