World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Cultural Landscape of the Serra de Tramuntana
Cultural Landscape of the Serra de Tramuntana
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Cultural Landscape of the Serra de Tramuntana

The Cultural Landscape of the Serra de Tramuntana located on a sheer-sided mountain range parallel to the north-western coast of the island of Mallorca. Millennia of agriculture in an environment with scarce resources has transformed the terrain and displays an articulated network of devices for the management of water revolving around farming units of feudal origins. The landscape is marked by agricultural terraces and inter-connected water works - including water mills - as well as dry stone constructions and farms.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The cultural landscape of the Serra de Tramuntana constitutes a significant example of the Mediterranean agricultural landscape, which, after centuries of transformations of the steep terrain morphology to exploit the scarce available resources and thanks to the specific orogenetic, climatic and vegetation conditions, has been made productive and well-adapted to human settlement. The system of terraces and cobbled road network, common to many Mediterranean landscapes, is here combined with an articulated network of devices for the management of water, revolving around farming units of feudal origins. Several villages, churches, sanctuaries, towers, lighthouses and small dry-stone structures punctuate the terraced landscape and contribute to its actual character.

Criterion (ii): The landscape of the Serra de Tramuntana eminently exemplifies the interchange between the Muslim and Christian cultures, which is representative of the Mediterranean area, in the combination of the Arabic water harvesting and management technology with the agricultural know-how and the territorial control system introduced by the Christian conquerors, who took over the island of Mallorca in 13th century AD. By this cultural interaction, a terraced agricultural landscape was created, featured by an articulated waterworks network, orchards, vegetable gardens and olive groves, which were earlier organised around small farm holdings, and later in large estates (posesiones) and which nowadays make up the physical and functional features of the Serra de Tramuntana. 

Criterion (iv): The cultural landscape of the Serra de Tramuntana represents a spectacular, peculiar example of a terraced. farmed landscape which combines an interconnected and highly specialised system of waterworks for collecting and storing water, featuring qanats, that are underground channels to harvest and transport water, canals, ditches, storage basins, with a system of terraces supported by dry-stone walls so as to make possible the cultivation of vegetables as well as fruit and olive trees in the terraced plots and including a sophisticated drainage system to avoid soil erosion. 

Criterion (v): The settlement pattern of the Tramuntana area bears significant witness to human adaptation to difficult environmental conditions, which has ingeniously made a region with scarce resources, both in term of land and water, suitable for farming and living. The feudal land subdivision system, applied to extreme orographic conditions, combined with the sophisticated waterworks technology of Arabic origins has resulted in complex farming units. Their land distribution and use pattern, comprising rocky areas on the tops of mountains, strips of woodland, slopes with terraces, extensive grazing land, fields for reaping, vineyards or fruit crops on flatter land, ensured over time the full exploitation of the existing resources. The Tramuntana area thus pays testimony to the continuous evolution of human settlement in a rugged and steep area of the island.

Integrity

The property is characterized by a high level of uniformity, in which the defining elements - the terraced land arrangements, the olive groves, the spatial organization in rural estates and the water supply network – retain their visual integrity to a considerable extent. The functional and socio-economical integrity, however, is today fragile due to the progressive increase of tourism and the possibly related development pressures. The entire Tramuntana district, witness to the same historical and development processes, acts as the buffer zone of the property. Today, the property does not seem to suffer from immediate development pressure, although the highly populated buffer zone may pose threats to the nominated property and these should be carefully monitored over time.

Authenticity

The property bears credible witness to the historical, cultural and socio- economical processes that have taken place in the Tramuntana area, gradually modifying the landscape to make it productive, and have shaped its actual aspect, although these traditional dynamic processes are declining in favour of tourism activities. The setting still exhibits a strong continuity with past layouts and the aesthetic qualities of this landscape have been appreciated by well-known artists and intellectuals who have contributed to amplify its evocative value. Traditional skills for the building and repair of the dry-stone structures have been consciously maintained through the establishment of a school of dry-stone masonry, to counter the changes brought by social and economic change.

Protection and management requirements

The property has been declared a “Picturesque Setting” and formally protected via a decree since 1972 (Decree 984/1972). Following the approval of the Spanish Historic Heritage Act (1985) and of the Balearic Historic Heritage Act (1998), the property has been further protected by designating a number of “Items of Cultural Interest” (Bien de Interes Cultural, BIC) according to the national and regional legislations. Further BIC declarations for Biniaraix, Ullarò and Galilea have been initiated and should be concluded. The Balearic Act (1991) governing natural spaces and urban planning regulations provides for the identification of areas to be protected for their ecological, geological and landscape values. The pivotal instrument for spatial planning is the Mallorca Spatial Plan (2004), which acknowledges the cultural and natural values of the Tramuntana Area and regulates the human settlement and land-use, taking into account heritage features, values and vocations of different areas, existing activities and the protection of the environment. Further plans related to specific areas in force are, i.e., the Plan for the Regulation of the Tramuntana Area’s Natural Resources (2007) and the Special Plans for the Protection of the Historic Site of Archduke Ludwig Salvator’s Estate (2002), of the Dry-Stone Route (2008), of Artà-Lluc Route (2008),of the Historic Artistic Architectural, Ecological and Scenic Value of the Municipality of Deià, of the Villages of Lluc, Escorca and of the Historic Centre of Pollença. Completion and enforcement of the other special plans for the protection of places with cultural values, especially of the water management systems and devices, should be envisaged.

The Consortium ’Serra de Tramuntana Paisatge Cultural’ is the body established in 2010 for the management of the site and its buffer zone; it should be made fully operational. It is currently composed of the regional government of the Balearic Islands and the Council of Mallorca, and aims at coordinating all the different cultural and natural policies, which are being implemented in the Serra de Tramuntana. It also includes a coordinating institution for the involvement of local stakeholders.

The Management Plan for the property stems from the Mallorca Spatial Plan and has been conceived as a comprehensive instrument alternative to other plans for the area by which to establish strategies and coordinate all activities within. It should be approved by the Consortium “Serra de Tramuntana Patrimoni Mundial”, responsible for the implementation of the Plan. Strategies to sustain the agricultural activities within the property and its buffer zone and to control the impact of the development of tourism activity should be envisaged to strengthen traditional agricultural activities, thus ensuring the sustainability of this landscape. Clarifications of responsibilities in monitoring are also advisable.

Links
Twitter page (X)

Instagram page

Facebook page

Serra de Tramuntana

Activities 1
Cultural Landscapes
News  2
World Olive Tree Day, 26 November
26 November 2020
Six new sites inscribed on UNESCO’s World Heritage List
27 June 2011
Events  1
XI National meeting of World Heritage Managers in Palma de Mallorca
18 Oct 2017 - 20 Oct 2017
Spain
Date of Inscription: 2011
Criteria: (ii)(iv)(v)
Property : 30,745 ha

Buffer zone: 78,617 ha
Dossier: 1371
N39 43 51.00 E2 41 41.00
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026