World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Madriu-Perafita-Claror Valley
Madriu-Perafita-Claror Valley
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Madriu-Perafita-Claror Valley

The cultural landscape of Madriu-Perafita-Claror Valley offers a microcosmic perspective of the way people have harvested the resources of the high Pyrenees over millennia. Its dramatic glacial landscapes of craggy cliffs and glaciers, with high open pastures and steep wooded valleys, covers an area of 4,247 ha, 9% of the total area of the principality. It reflects past changes in climate, economic fortune and social systems, as well as the persistence of pastoralism and a strong mountain culture, notably the survival of a communal land-ownership system dating back to the 13th century. The site features houses, notably summer settlements, terraced fields, stone tracks and evidence of iron smelting.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis 

The Madriu-Perafita-Claror Valley is an exceptional geographical unit located in the south-eastern part of the Principality of Andorra, in the heart of the Pyrenees. It covers an area of 4,247 ha or a little more than 9% of the national territory. A protective buffer zone of 4,092 ha surrounds this area.

The upper part of the valley is an exposed glacial landscape, with spectacular steep cliffs, rock and lake glaciers. Lower down, the valley narrows and becomes more wooded, while in its lowest section the river flows into a short gorge. A secondary valley, the Perafita-Claror Valley, merges with the Madriu Valley from the South-West.

The Madriu-Perfita-Claror Valley is a microcosm that illustrates the way in which man has harvested the mountain resources over the past millennia. It also reflects the persistence of an ancient communal system of land management – four communities own land within the property. Its spectacular glacial landscapes with vast pastures and wooded valleys reflect climate change, the economy and social systems, as well as the persistence of pastoralism and a strong mountain culture. The property, the last place in the country not to have roads, comprises amongst others diverse agro-pastoral complexes in the high mountain, agricultural centres in mid-mountain areas, a communication system based on a network of partially paved trails and the vestiges of a specific steelmaking activity: the Catalan Forge.

More precisely, the inscribed site contains many traces of human occupation that express in a singular manner the perfect symbiosis and the precious balance between the land and humankind, between their resources and their needs; among these, bornes or small huts with vaulted stone roofs, some of which are still used by shepherds; orris in ruin, stables and cheese dairies, houses with side barns where grain and hay were stored; traces of terraced fields and foundries; low stone walls and paved tracks, etc.

Criterion (v) : The Madriu-Perafita-Claror Valley is a microcosm of the way the inhabitants have harvested the scarce resources of the high Pyrenees over the past millennia to create a sustainable living environment in harmony with the mountain landscape. The valley is a reflection of an ancient communal system of land management that has survived over 700 years.

Integrity

The integrity of the Madriu-Perafita-Claror Valley is based on the geographical and historical uniqueness that characterizes it.

The Valley forms a coherent unit of 4,247 ha combining cultural and natural values. In this encyclopaedic and essential landscape, the sedimentation of the physical and human experience is continuous. The buffer zones, including the extension in 2006 to the international border between Andorra and Spain, have enabled the protection of the entire property.

Authenticity

The Madriu-Perafita-Claror Valley bears an extraordinarily well-preserved and complete testimony to a way of life and relationship between people and their land, between nature and culture.

In the Valley, a distinctive relationship between the populations and nature is evident. Based on respect for the environment and its emblematic character, this relationship has never faltered among the local population. Its character is defined by the wise use of the resources offered by the mountain and by the deep respect for the associated values and qualities. The customary standards that have preserved it and that rule it are the result of this symbiosis between man and his environment. The Madriu-Perafita-Claror Valley conserves its qualities intact. Historically preserved because of its distance from urban pressure areas and, for the most part, the absence of any road, the few interventions that could affect its authenticity, such as the use of some construction materials or the presence of mobile huts that do not conform to the heritage character of the Valley, are perfectly reversible.

Protection and management requirements

Listed as property of cultural interest in the category of cultural landscapes, in 2005, the Madriu-Perafita-Claror Valley is protected by the Law 9/2003 for cultural heritage of Andorra. In 2006, the protection zone prescribed by the Law was harmonized with the buffer zone.

With regard to the management of the property, in agreement with the Law and the Declaration and Protection Decrees, the four local administrations concerned with the management of the Valley drafted and approved a management document that was validated by the Andorran Government. The Management Plan for the Madriu-Perafita-Claror Valley entered into force on 28 December 2011, and foresees the preservation of the cultural landscape, the biodiversity, the fauna and the flora. In accordance with efficient conservation goals, it controls the associated objectives and establishes the development of sustainable activities. In particular, it emphasizes the need to maintain traditional activities such as agriculture, which has noticeably declined and will require revitalization and support programmes so that the cultural landscape of the Madriu-Perafita-Claror Valley remains a living landscape and conserves the authenticity provided by the continuance of these cultural practices. Additionally, priority was given to the realization of an overall access strategy.

Links
Madriu-Perafita-Claror Valley

Activities 1
Cultural Landscapes
News  1
World Heritage Committee puts Medieval Monuments in Kosovo on Danger List and extends site in Andorra, ending this year’s inscriptions
13 July 2006
Media
play_arrow Madriu-Perafita-Claror Valley (UNESCO/NHK)
Andorra
Date of Inscription: 2004
Minor boundary modification inscribed year: 2006
Criteria: (v)
Property : 4,247 ha

Buffer zone: 4,092 ha
Dossier: 1160bis
Part of Communes of Encamp, Andorra la Vella, Saint Julia de Loria and Escaldes-Engordany
N42 29 41 E1 35 44
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2012 2010 2008 2006 2005
Protections
by other conservation instruments

2 protections / 3 elements

2003 Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage (2 elements)

Summer solstice fire festivals in the Pyrenees
Transhumance, the seasonal droving of livestock
RAMSAR (1 element)

Vall de Madriu-Perafita-Claror

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026