World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
The Colonial Transisthmian Route of Panamá
The Colonial Transisthmian Route of Panamá
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
The Colonial Transisthmian Route of Panamá

From the 16th century, the isthmus of Panama became a global strategic asset facilitating the transportation of goods and people between the Iberian Peninsula and the colonies of the Kingdom of Spain in America, the archipelago of the Philippines and the Canary Islands. The serial property bears testimony of the crossing of the isthmus including strategic fortified settlements, historic towns, archaeological sites and roads used to connect the Caribbean Sea and the Pacific Ocean until the mid-18th century.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

From the 16th century, the isthmus of Panama in Central America, became a global strategic geopolitical asset facilitating the transportation of goods and people between the Iberian Peninsula and the colonies of the Kingdom of Spain in South and North America, the archipelago of the Philippines and the Canary Islands. The Colonial Transisthmian Route of Panamá bears testimony of the crossing of the isthmus including strategic fortified settlements, historic towns, archaeological sites and parts of the roads that were used to connect the Caribbean Sea and the Pacific Ocean until the mid-18th century. Camino de Cruces, one of the itineraries used for crossing the isthmus, is the direct antecedent of the 19th century Panama Railroad and the Panama Canal, which opened in 1914.

The use of the route goes back to pre-colonial times and the series includes a defensive system that protected travellers from the frequent actions of crime, robbery and attacks of pirates, buccaneers and other perils motivated by the invaluable treasures transported or stored in strategic locations.

Criterion (ii): The Colonial Transisthmian Route of Panamá, constructed as part of the process of colonisation of the Americas, played a significant role in the establishment of a global communication system that facilitated the exchange of goods between the Iberian Peninsula and the colonies of the Kingdom of Spain in South and North America, the archipelago of the Philippines and the Canary Islands. This process resulted in the interchange of ideas, skills, and traditions between different populations, including Indigenous Peoples, enslaved Africans and European colonisers. This process, which was not a peaceful one, lasted over three centuries and was centred on the expansion of the hegemony of the Kingdom of Spain, which strongly influenced and marked the history and further development of the Americas.

Criterion (iv): The Colonial Transisthmian Route of Panamá demonstrates an outstanding example of a route enabling transcontinental flows of culture, resources and colonial power during a crucial stage in the history of the Americas. The location of historic port cities, fortifications and roads reflects the emergence of a colonial territorial approach that adapted and made use of challenging climatic and geographic conditions, as well as, indigenous and local knowledge, for the development of a communication and commercial system which had global impacts.

Integrity

In spite of disruptions, the first phase of The Colonial Transisthmian Route of Panamá demonstrates the integrity that allows to understand clearly the crossing of the Isthmus. The selected component parts and their settings help to show the overall integrity of the route. Although The Colonial Transisthmian Route of Panamá lost its original functionality, it kept functional integrity based on re-use by miners crossing the Isthmus towards California with the Panama Railroad and by means of inspiring the modern infrastructure of the Panama Canal.

While the integrity of component parts within Panama City is vulnerable to urban development pressures, the buffer zones and urban regulations, together with a Heritage Impact Assessment mechanism recently adopted should ensure the protection and safeguarding of the property as a whole and its urban component parts in particular.

Authenticity

The Colonial Transisthmian Route of Panamá is the result of a historic process of over 500 years which includes the transformation of the heritage route. This represents a continuity in the use of the route, preserving the spirit of crossing the isthmus through modernisation.

Even though the authenticity of the setting of Historic Centre of Panama has been compromised by the development of Cinta Costera, and in Archaeological site of Panama Viejo with high-rise buildings impacting on sightlines, built heritage in Casco Antiguo and archaeological heritage in Panamá Viejo provide continuity to its historical urban fabric and bear witness to the process of settling in the Americas during European colonisation.

Protection and management requirements

Legal protection of the property is provided by national and local government laws for the protection of natural and cultural heritage. A new General Law of Culture has been passed (Law 175 of 3 November 2020) which covers the component parts of the Archaeological Site of Panamá Viejo (005), the Historic District of Panamá (006) and the Castle of San Lorenzo (001). The Law No. 456 adopted in November 2024 declares the Colonial Transisthmian Route as one cultural heritage property. Furthermore, the legal protection and management of the three sections of the Camino de Cruces (component parts 002 to 004) is based on the legislation covering the two National Parks and the Protected Forest and Protected Landscape in which they are situated.

Several Ministries (mainly Culture and Environment), national and local entities, as well as the Canal Authority are responsible for planning and coordinating different aspects of the management of the property. Therefore, coordination and shared actions are undertaken. The Comité de la Ruta Colonial Transístmica de Panamá (Committee for the Colonial Transisthmian Route of Panamá) has been created as the Governmental Management Authority, that is in charge of implementing the management plan of the serial property.

Different means for the improvement of the systematic monitoring of cultural and natural properties are being prepared. Regulations for Heritage Impact Assessments have been elaborated and approved, strengthening the management system and should be operationalised considering capacity building to relevant actors on this procedure and the Outstanding Universal Value of the property.

Commitment of financially supporting the conservation of the whole property as part of the policy of the State for the conservation of heritage has been made.

A specific-tourism plan and interpretation strategy are to be completed in the short term to enable the adequate visitation presenting the heritage route as a whole based on its Outstanding Universal Value.

News  1
UNESCO World Heritage: 26 new sites inscribed
17 July 2025
Panama
Date of Inscription: 2025
Criteria: (ii)(iv)
Property : 689.88 ha

Buffer zone: 37,519.43 ha
Dossier: 1582rev
Serial: yes

Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026