World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Paleochristian and Byzantine Monuments of ...
Paleochristian and Byzantine Monuments of Thessalonika
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Paleochristian and Byzantine Monuments of Thessalonika

Founded in 315 B.C., the provincial capital and sea port of Thessalonika was one of the first bases for the spread of Christianity. Among its Christian monuments are fine churches, some built on the Greek cross plan and others on the three-nave basilica plan. Constructed over a long period, from the 4th to the 15th century, they constitute a diachronic typological series, which had considerable influence in the Byzantine world. The mosaics of the rotunda, St Demetrius and St David are among the great masterpieces of early Christian art.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Founded in 315 BC, the provincial capital and sea port of Thessalonika was one of the first bases for the spread of Christianity. Among its Christian monuments are fine churches, some built on the Greek cross plan and others on the three-aisled basilica plan. Constructed over a long period, from the 4th to the 15th century, they constitute a diachronic typological series, which had considerable influence in the Byzantine world. The mosaics of Thessalonika’s monuments (such as the Rotunda, Saint Demetrius and Hosios David [Latomou Monastery]) are among the great masterpieces of Early Christian art.

The monuments of Thessalonika inscribed on the World Heritage List are public edifices of various functions, religious, secular, military, including the 4 km long city walls. Because of their outstanding design and major artistic value these monuments are included among the most significant of the Byzantine period. Throughout the Byzantine era, the city constituted a cultural centre that determined the developments not only in immediately surrounding but also in neighbouring areas. It played an active or even competitive role in artistic trends originating in Constantinople.

The monuments of Thessalonika reveal a continuous artistic exchange with the greatest cultural centres of each era (Rome, Constantinople). The city itself was an important artistic centre, from its foundation and throughout the Byzantine period. Wall painting ensembles, mosaics and frescoes, preserved in Thessalonika’s monuments, represent some of the major artistic trends, that have been developed in Byzantine monumental painting from its beginnings (the Rotunda, Saint Demetrius, Hosios David), through the first period after iconoclasm (Saint Sophia) and the Comnenian period (Hosios David frescoes) to its culmination known as the Palaeologan Renaissance (late Byzantine period). To this last period belong significant monuments such as the Holy Apostles, the chapel of Saint Euthymios in the Church of Saint Demetrius, Saint Nikolaos Orphanos, Saint Panteleimon, the Transfiguration of the Saviour, Saint Aikaterini, Prophitis Ilias, the Katholikon (main church) of the Vlatadon Monastery which reflect all the tendencies of the Palaeologan Renaissance. 

Criterion (i): The mosaics of the Rotunda, Saint Demetrius and Hosios David’s (Latomou Monastery) are among the great masterpieces of Early Christian art. 

Criterion (ii): The influence of the Thessalonian churches on the development of the monumental arts was considerable first in the Byzantine and later the Serbian world, whether in the Early Christian period, the Middle Byzantine era or the Palaeologan Renaissance. 

Criterion (iv): The Christian monuments of Thessalonika are outstanding examples of churches built according to central, basilical and transitional architectural types over a period going from the 4th to the 15th century. For this reason they constitute a series which is a typological point of reference.

Integrity

All monuments are preserved intact, or as in the case of the city walls, with minimal losses. The boundaries are adequate to protect the fabric of the monuments and there are buffer zones for some of them. The continual use of the buildings (from their foundation until today) proved beneficial to their state of conservation, despite certain inevitable interventions.

There is a risk of natural disasters such as earthquakes while the fact that the monuments are all in a developing and changing urban area may lead to pressures from time to time.

Authenticity

All monuments, despite any interventions over the centuries, maintain all elements (architecture and decoration) of their initial phase. In the first quarter of the 20th century the monuments commenced to be restored and low quality recent interventions or additions were removed (e.g. the porch of the Church of the Holy Apostles and the buttresses of the church of Prophitis Ilias). Minor restoration projects that were always documented were carried out (e.g. the south dome of the narthex of the Church of Panagia Chalkeon). Exceptionally, a large scale restoration was carried out in the church of Saint Demetrius, after the disastrous fire of 1917. During the last 30 years small scale rescue restorations were generally carried out. The restoration and consolidation work as well as landscaping realised until now in the monuments of Thessalonika contributed to their maintenance and the enhancement of their authenticity.

Protection and management requirements

The properties are protected by the provisions of the Archaeological Law 3028/2002 “On the Protection of Antiquities and Cultural Heritage in general” and by separate ministerial decisions published in the Official Government Gazette. Protection and management are carried out by the Ministry of Culture, Education and Religious Affairs through the responsible regional service (Ephorate of Antiquities of Thessaloniki City). The specific terms of protection are defined in detail by separate ministerial decrees for each monument.

The use of the Byzantine churches is granted to the Church of Greece (Saint Sophia, Saint Demetrius, Acheiropoietos, Saint Panteleimon, the Transfiguration of the Saviour, the Holy Apostles, Saint Aikaterini, Prophitis Ilias, Panagia Chalkeon) and to the Ecumenical Patriarchate (Saint Nikolaos Orphanos, Hosios David [Latomou Monastery], Vlatadon Monastery).

Restoration of the roof of Hosios David (Latomou Monastery) and landscaping of the surrounding area in 2002, launched the last series of conservation interventions (3rd Community Support Framework). Subsequently the following works were carried out: a) landscaping of the surrounding area in sections of the walls of Heptapyrgio, of the byzantine Bath, of Prophitis Ilias, b) consolidation of the mosaics in Rotunda, Saint Demetrius, the Holy Apostles, c) consolidation works in Acheiropoietos, Rotunda minaret, Heptapyrgio, Tower of Trigonio, and d) exemplary restoration of Saint Panteleimon church, awarded the Europa Nostra prize. Heptapyrgion’s use has changed: it now houses the offices of the Ephorate of Antiquities of Thessaloniki City and two permanent exhibitions. Furthermore, Heptapyrgio is open to visitors with free entrance. It is also an area for outdoor events. The Tower of Trigonio is open to the public.

In the context of the Peripheral Development Corporate Plan further restoration works are carried out on the monuments. The Ephorate of Antiquities of Thessaloniki City in collaboration with the Aristotle University of Thessaloniki implements also the project “Prospelasis” which is intended to facilitate access of people with disabilities. The aim of the Ephorate of Antiquities of Thessaloniki City is to create better conditions in order to facilitate the accessibility of monuments not only to scientific groups but also to a wider public. Daily effort is required for the protection and enhancement of the monuments as they are integrated in a modern city, and consequently burdened by human activity.

Links
Ephorate of Antiquities of Thessaloniki City Facebook page (in Greek only)

Google Arts & Culture: Story

Hellenic Ministry of Culture

Activities 1
World Heritage Cities Programme
Events  1
Bikeabout To Launch Circum-Mediterranean Tour Of World Heritage Sites
24 Sep 1997 - 30 Jun 1998
Greece
Date of Inscription: 1988
Criteria: (i)(ii)(iv)
Property : 5.327 ha

Dossier: 456
Serial: yes

Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026