World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
La Lonja de la Seda de Valencia
La Lonja de la Seda de Valencia
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
La Lonja de la Seda de Valencia

Built between 1482 and 1533, this group of buildings was originally used for trading in silk (hence its name, the Silk Exchange) and it has always been a centre for commerce. It is a masterpiece of late Gothic architecture. The grandiose Sala de Contratación (Contract or Trading Hall), in particular, illustrates the power and wealth of a major Mediterranean mercantile city in the 15th and 16th centuries.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

La Longa de la Seda de Valencia, located on the Mediterranean coast of the Iberian Peninsula, is without a doubt the most emblematic group of buildings of the city. La Longa de la Seda de Valencia is an exceptionally well-preserved example of a secular building in late Gothic style of outstanding artistic value.  It bears eloquent witness to the role played in the Mediterranean and far beyond by the merchants of the Iberian Peninsula in the 15th and 16th centuries.

Built from 1483 on the initiative of the Consell de la Ciutat (City Council) and under the direction of the architects Pere Compte and Joan Ivarra, the complex of buildings was originally dedicated to the silk trade (hence the name "Silk Exchange"). Nearly half of the monuments’ surface area, which is rectangular in plan, is covered by the Sala de Contratación. The tower (including the chapel), the Sala del Consulado del Mar and the Patio de los Naranjos (Court of Orange Trees) complete the complex.   

The Sala de Contratación is a magnificent hall in Flamboyant Gothic style. The interior, with three main aisles, is covered by a series of cross vaults resting on slender helical pillars almost 16 metres high. The floor is paved with Alcublas marble of different colours. On the walls, a Latin inscription in Gothic characters reminds the merchants of their duties as merchants and good Christians: not to revert to usury in their trade, so as to be able to attain eternal life. Light enters through soaring Gothic windows, the external frames of which, like the doors, are exuberantly ornamented, notably by a series of grotesque gargoyles. In the centre of the main facade, on the Plaza del Mercado, is the imposing doorway, crowned by an image of the Virgin, and with the royal coat of arms of Aragon. The delicate windows on either side are surmounted by the arms of the town. The same architectonic scheme is repeated at the other end of the hall. This building, like the rest of the ensemble, is crenellated. The Taula de Canvis, the first municipal banking institution created in 1407, was installed in the salon dedicated to commercial transactions.

Access to the chapel which forms the ground floor of the Tower is via the Sala de Contratación. It is square in plan, with vaulting springing from angular column groups. Access to the upper floors is via a remarkable helical staircase executed with great technical perfection and without a central axis.

The Consulado del Mar, built at the beginning of the 16th century, has a vaulted cellar and two levels. In addition to the aforementioned Pere Compte, project managers Joan Corbera and Domingo de Urtiaga were also involved in its construction. It is a late Gothic style building, exuberant in the decoration of its facades, especially on the upper floor where the windows have richly decorated sills and lintels and are crowned by portrait medallions. The interior is notable for the carved decoration enriched by gilding and paintings of the chamber on the first floor - the piano nobile, or Cambra Dourada (Golden Room). The coffered ceiling came from the old City Hall, now demolished.

La Lonja is a typical example of functional architecture for commercial activities. The ornamental repertoire that enriches the building expresses a symbolic message that exalts the dignity of the merchant by encouraging him to exercise his important social responsibility, in solidarity with the community in which he is integrated, with the utmost probity, fairness and honesty.

In addition to being a very representative example of medieval places of commerce, the building incorporates elements of the new architectonic language that developed in Europe at the end of the 15th century incorporating the most daring progress in the field of construction techniques (admirable twisted columns and vaults of remarkable complexity, all in freestone of the highest quality).

Criterion (i): La Lonja de la Seda de Valencia represents a masterpiece of European Gothic art, a true temple of commerce based on a unique architectonic and symbolic programme. 

Criterion (iv): La Lonja de la Seda de Valencia is an outstanding example of a secular building in late Gothic style, which dramatically illustrates the power and the wealth of the great Mediterranean mercantile cities. 

Integrity

La Lonja de la Seda de Valencia has all the essential attributes to represent its Outstanding Universal Value. After more than five hundred years, La Lonja preserves its architectonic characteristics in optimal conditions, as well as its decorative and symbolic elements which enrich the whole ensemble. There is nothing unusual about this remarkable state of conservation given that La Lonja has been in continuous use over the centuries, and in view of the excellent quality of the materials used in its construction.

Authenticity

The authenticity of La Lonja de Valence is high: it has been maintained meticulously for five centuries, and restoration carried out over the years has respected the original materials, so as to preserve the overall appearance of the buildings.

Very few elements have been introduced or significant modifications made since the 15th century, and few major changes have been made to its original vocation - trading house, formerly for oil and silk and, subsequently, for grains and cereals. The stucco decoration of the passageway leading from the chapel to the Consulado del Mar building, added in 1832, is faithful to the original ornamental plan; and the raising of the tower, following the repair of the roofs in 1891-1920, with their crenelations, also reproduces the style of the original structures adjoining it. Appropriate interventions for the restoration and enhancement of the building, carried out with meticulous rigour in recent years, have greatly contributed to improving its appearance.

Protection and management requirements

The ensemble of La Lonja de la Seda was declared a National Historic and Artistic Monument in 1931. Management of the complex in terms of conservation, maintenance, enhancement, cultural dissemination and attention to visitors (in groups or individually), is the responsibility of the owner of the property, i.e. the Valencia City Council and, in an operational capacity, the Municipal Delegation for Culture, assisted by the managers and technicians of the Historical and Cultural Heritage Service, Museums and Monuments Section.

With the aim of optimizing the management and guaranteeing the protection of the property, which is subject to national and regional legal regulations, the Valencian City Council had asked the Polytechnic University of Valencia to undertake a global study of the monument in order to draw up a conservation master plan for the property and its surroundings. The "Master Plan for the Conservation of La Lonja de Valencia" was approved on 9 December 2008 by the City Council of Valencia under the relevant corporate agreement, and in agreement with the Generalitat of Valencia, the regional government.

The entire area is currently the subject of a vast urban planning programme involving the rehabilitation of many private homes, the restoration of public buildings and the improvement of infrastructures. This programme is designed to restore the historic centre for residential purposes and to revive cultural activities, in particular by bringing a student population back to the area.

Links
Google Arts & Culture: Story

Ministerio de Educación (in Spanish)

Museos, monumentos y más cultura en Valencia

 View photos from OUR PLACE the World Heritage collection

Fundación Valencia III Milenio

Infovalencia (Valencia Tourist & Convention Bureau)

News  2
World Heritage sites participate in Earth Hour
28 March 2012
UNESCO and Partners Demonstrate Space Technologies for Monitoring World Heritage
7 October 2006
Events  2
International Conference on Architecture and Cities for the 21st Century
2 Jul 1998 - 4 Jul 1998
Bikeabout To Launch Circum-Mediterranean Tour Of World Heritage Sites
24 Sep 1997 - 30 Jun 1998
Media
play_arrow La Lonja de la Seda de Valencia (UNESCO/NHK)
play_arrow La Lonja de la Seda de Valencia (UNESCO/NHK)
Spain
Date of Inscription: 1996
Criteria: (i)(iv)
Property : 0.2 ha

Dossier: 782
Province and Autonomous Community of Valencia
N39 28 27.9 E0 22 42.4
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026