World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
The Archaeological Heritage of Niah National ...
The Archaeological Heritage of Niah National Park’s Caves Complex
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
The Archaeological Heritage of Niah National Park’s Caves Complex
This complex of colossal, interconnected caverns is located near the west coast of Borneo Island at the centre of Niah National Park.  It contains the longest known records of human interaction with rainforest, spanning at least 50,000 years, from the Pleistocene to the Mid-Holocene periods. The rich archaeological deposits, prehistoric rock paintings and boat-shaped burials found at the northern edge of the massif illustrate biological and human life during this time, and contribute greatly to the knowledge of human development, adaptation and migration in southeast Asia, as well as in a global context. Local communities still observe an ancient tradition of molong – ‘take only what you need’— when harvesting guano and valuable edible bird’s nests from the caves.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The Archaeological Heritage of Niah National Park’s Caves Complex, located in Niah National Park on the west coast of Borneo Island, is a group of archaeological sites that contain the longest-known records of human interaction with rainforests. Within a complex of colossal interconnected caverns and caves located in a limestone massif, are archaeological sites, rock paintings, and boat-shaped coffins. This rich evidence demonstrates a multifaceted process of human development and adaptation to the physical environment, specifically to the modification of the tropical rainforest from at least 50,000 years ago to the Mid-Holocene, including the transition from foraging to rice farming, arboriculture, and vegeculture. The findings here have contributed significantly to the debate over the nature of the early dispersal of ancient humans across this region and globally.

Criterion (iii): The Niah Caves Complex contains archaeological evidence that represents an exceptional testimony to the cultural traditions of the two disconnected populations in the distant past who existed from the Pleistocene to the Mid-Holocene, exhibiting the rainforest lifestyles, forest management systems (vegeculture), and elaborate funerary practices of prehistoric humans. It contributes significantly to the existing knowledge of human development, adaptation, and dispersal in Southeast Asia and in a global context.

Criterion (v): The Niah Caves Complex is an outstanding example of very early human settlement and land use in the Southeast Asian region, and of human interaction with a changing environment during prehistoric times.

Integrity

The property is of adequate size and contains all the attributes necessary to convey its Outstanding Universal Value, including the entire rock massif and its complex of caves within which the excavated sites, rock paintings, and boat-shaped coffins are located, as well as the sites identified as having archaeological potential. The physical fabric and significant features of the property are in good condition, and the negative factors affecting the property are under control.

Authenticity

The geo-morphological features of the massif and caves have not changed significantly despite the slow dissolution of the limestone over time as a result of natural processes. The excavated sites are well preserved without backfill or other forms of later alteration, testifying to their authentic state at the time of their excavation. Although the locations of the objects extracted from these sites have been changed, these archaeological findings have been appropriately conserved, stored, and displayed in museums. The rock paintings are in their original locations, without any interventions.

Protection and management requirements

The property is state-owned and is legally protected at the national and state levels. At the national level, the property is included in the Bukit Subis Protected Forest that was established under the Forest Ordinance in 1951. Niah National Park was established in 1974 and is protected by the National Parks and Nature Reserves Ordinance and the Wildlife Protection Ordinance of 1998. At the state level, the property is protected by the Sarawak Heritage Ordinance, 2019. The Sarawak Forestry Corporation and the Sarawak Museum Department are the main governmental institutions responsible for implementing the legislative provisions. The buffer zone and a one-kilometre radius zone from the property boundaries provide additional layers of protection.

The management system is a collaborative and coordinated one between the main stakeholders, with the Sarawak Forestry Corporation taking the lead while the Sarawak Museum Department is responsible for the conservation of the cultural heritage. The local communities are involved in the management of the site in a number of ways. The management system is supported and advised by the Special Park Committee for Niah National Park. The management activities are guided by a number of plans, the most comprehensive being the Integrated Conservation Management Plan for the Archaeological Heritage of Niah National Park’s Caves Complex (2024). The key challenges that require long-term attention include securing sustainable funding and the expertise of the staff working on site, the fading of the rock paintings, and the algal growth at the excavated sites.

News  1
UNESCO World Heritage: 24 new sites inscribed
1 August 2024
Malaysia
Date of Inscription: 2024
Criteria: (iii)(v)
Property : 3,609 ha

Buffer zone: 344 ha
Dossier: 1014
N3 48 15.45 E113 46 50.76
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026