World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Diy-Gid-Biy Cultural Landscape of the Mandara ...
Diy-Gid-Biy Cultural Landscape of the Mandara Mountains
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Diy-Gid-Biy Cultural Landscape of the Mandara Mountains

Located in the Far North Region of Cameroon, the property includes sixteen archaeological sites across seven villages. Known as Diy-Gid-Biy (meaning “Ruin of the Chief’s Residence” in the Mafa language), these dry-stone architectural structures were likely built between the 12th and 17th centuries. While their original builders remain unknown, the area has been inhabited by the Mafa people since the 15th century. The surrounding landscape features agricultural terraces, homes, tombs, places of worship, and artisan activities, reflecting a long-standing cultural and spiritual connection between the people and their environment.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The Diy-Gid-Biy Cultural Landscape of the Mandara Mountains is located in the Far North Region of Cameroon. It is organised, in the form of terraces, around a group of sixteen archaeological ruins, or Diy-Gid-Biy, spread across seven villages associated with agricultural terraces. These dry-stone architectural structures were probably built between the 12th and 17th centuries. While the identity of their builders remains unknown, the property is currently mainly occupied by the Mafa people, who settled in the region between the 15th and 17th centuries. The expression “Diy Gid Biy” literally means “Ruin of the Chief’s Residence” in the Mafa language. Today, the Diy-Gid-Biy are used by the communities as religious sites. On the slopes and at the base of the mountain there are agricultural terraces, residential buildings, tombs, places of worship and many artisan activities.

Criterion (iii): The Diy-Gid-Biy Cultural Landscape of the Mandara Mountains is a unique testament to a now-vanished civilisation, which created a remarkable dry-stone architecture, organised into terraces, that is very rare in sub-Saharan Africa. Although little is known about this civilisation, it shaped the landscape over a period of more than five centuries (from the 12th to the 17th century). These sixteen Diy-Gid-Biy ruins are characterised by their atypical dry-stone architecture, their location in a remote mountainous region, their designation as chiefs’ residences and the pottery they contain, which was originally used for ritual purposes.

The Mafa who now live in the area play a significant role in perpetuating the landscape by continuing to use the structures as sacrificial and ritual sites.

Integrity

The integrity of the property lies in the archaeological structures and terraces, which are fully integrated into the Mandara Mountains area. All the attributes necessary to convey in a substantial manner the Outstanding Universal Value of the property are included within the boundaries of the property. However, the integrity of the property is very vulnerable, due to the degraded condition of the structures, combined with challenges related to political insecurity, the growing effects of climate change and environmental degradation.

Authenticity

The property presents a high degree of authenticity, due to the richness of its built structures. The Diy-Gid-Biy, fully integrated into the cultural and worship practices that shape the daily lives of the Mafa people, are thus being actively preserved. Extensive scientific research should provide insights into the origins, techniques and construction processes of the Diy-Gid-Biy, their previous functions and, ultimately, the civilisation of the people who built them.

Protection and management requirements

The Diy-Gid-Biy Cultural Landscape of the Mandara Mountains has been listed as a National Heritage Site by Ministerial Order No. 0002/MINAC/SG of 28 February 2019. It is also protected under the Law of 18 April 2013 governing the cultural heritage of Cameroon, which protects listed sites. The property is also subject to a set of traditional protections and taboos prohibiting access to the Diy-Gid-Biy ruins outside of rituals.

Careful monitoring and land-use planning instruments are essential complements to legal protection for the long-term protection, conservation and transmission to future generations of the property and its Outstanding Universal Value.

The management of the property, which falls under the responsibility of the Ministry of Arts and Culture (MINAC) in collaboration with local communities and decentralised local units, is carried out by three separate committees: a ministerial committee, a technical committee and a management committee. This system is reinforced at the traditional level by the appointment, in each village, of a guardian who serves as a sacrificer during rituals. A management plan has been developed for the period 2024-2028, and a curator has been appointed to oversee the management of all the Diy-Gid-Biy ruins, acting as an intermediary between the State, the guides and the guardians/sacrificers. However, representatives from municipal subdivisions are lacking in this management system, which would benefit from being restructured on the basis of an inter-village approach. Participatory management is crucial, and management methods should be focused on efficiency and the achievement of long-term goals, with the support of sufficient staff.

Conservation and research strategies are crucial to safeguard the attributes of the property and shed light on the people who built it. Tourist access should be carefully studied and planned, in order to preserve the authenticity of the property. Appropriate risk management should be integrated into management strategies and instruments to address natural and anthropogenic threats.

News  1
UNESCO World Heritage: 26 new sites inscribed
17 July 2025
Cameroon
Date of Inscription: 2025
Criteria: (iii)
Property : 2,500 ha

Buffer zone: 2,372.3 ha
Dossier: 1745
N10 54 12 E13 47 44
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026