World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Rjukan-Notodden Industrial Heritage Site
Rjukan-Notodden Industrial Heritage Site
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Rjukan-Notodden Industrial Heritage Site

Located in a dramatic landscape of mountains, waterfalls and river valleys, the site comprises hydroelectric power plants, transmission lines, factories, transport systems and towns. The complex was established by the Norsk-Hydro Company to manufacture artificial fertilizer from nitrogen in the air. It was built to meet the Western world’s growing demand for agricultural production in the early 20th century. The company towns of Rjukan and Notodden show workers’ accommodation and social institutions linked by rail and ferry to ports where the fertilizer was loaded. The Rjukan-Notodden site manifests an exceptional combination of industrial assets and themes associated to the natural landscape. It stands out as an example of a new global industry in the early 20th century.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Located in a dramatic landscape of mountains, waterfalls and river valleys, the Rjukan-Notodden Industrial Heritage Site comprises a cluster of pioneering hydro-electric power plants, transmission lines, factories, transport systems and towns. The complex was established by the Norsk-Hydro company which brought together results of science and research from Europe and North America to produce hydroelectricity and manufacture artificial fertilizer from nitrogen in the air in response to the Western world’s demand for increased agricultural production in the early 20th century. Rjukan and Notodden company towns incorporated social innovations in workforce provision influenced by international planning ideas which together with innovative transport solutions enabled supply of a new, globally significant product for the world-wide market.

Criterion (ii): Rjukan-Notodden Industrial Heritage Site manifests an exceptional combination of industrial themes and assets tied to the landscape, which exhibit an important exchange on technological development in the early 20th century.

Criterion (iv): The technological ensemble of Rjukan-Notodden comprising dams, tunnels, pipes, power plants, power lines, factory areas and equipment, the company towns, railway lines and ferry service, located in a landscape where the natural topography enabled hydroelectricity to be generated in the necessary large amounts stands out as an example of new global industry in the early 20th century.

Integrity

In general all important remaining physical structures and objects that are testimony to the industrial pioneering period of the production of artificial fertilizer for agriculture in Norway in the early 20th century are within the boundaries of the area which is of adequate size to ensure the complete representation of the features and processes which convey the property's significance. The physical fabric of the property and its significant features are generally in a good condition. The property is not suffering from adverse effects and neglect.

Authenticity

The property incorporates buildings, structures and remains which convey credibly and truthfully its Outstanding Universal Value as a pioneering industrial enterprise for the production of artificial fertilizer in the early 20th century.

Protection and management requirements

The property is protected under the Cultural Heritage Act 1978, amended 2009 and the Planning & Building Act 2009, amended 2012. All specified items will be protected by the Cultural Heritage Act or specific heritage provisions of the Planning & Building Act by June 2015. The buffer zone is protected under the Cultural Heritage Act and zoning controls pursuant to the Planning & Building Act.

A ‘Declaration of Intent’ has been signed by the State Party and relevant county council and municipalities undertaking to protect the Outstanding Universal Value and the buffer zone. A provisional World Heritage Council comprising representatives from the Directorate for Cultural Heritage, the county authority, municipalities and the Norwegian Industrial Workers Museum has been set up to deliver a management structure for the property. A World Heritage Coordinator with responsibility for the whole area will be appointed. The Management Plan 2014-2019 includes an Action Plan with goals and actions for conservation, strengthening of Outstanding Universal Value, competence building and research, information & presentation, and visitor management and will include a risk preparedness strategy.
Links
Facebook page

World Heritage sites in Norway (in English, Norwegian Bokmål, and Sami)

Google Arts & Culture

Rjukan-Notodden Industrial Heritage Site (in English and Norwegian)

News  4
International Day for Monuments and Sites 2021 - Complex Pasts: Diverse Futures
16 April 2021
Videos: Site managers report on Covid-19
26 October 2020
World Heritage Committee announces 2016 meeting in Istanbul, 24 new sites inscribed in Bonn
8 July 2015
Sites in Norway, Germany, Israel, UK and USA inscribed on UNESCO’s World Heritage List
5 July 2015
Norway
Date of Inscription: 2015
Criteria: (ii)(iv)
Property : 4,959.5 ha

Buffer zone: 33,967.6 ha
Dossier: 1486
N59 52 43 E8 35 37
N59 52 43 E8 35 37
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026