World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Evaporitic Karst and Caves of Northern ...
Evaporitic Karst and Caves of Northern Apennines
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Evaporitic Karst and Caves of Northern Apennines
This serial property is an unusually well-preserved and extensive epigenic gypsum karst terrain. It includes a very high density of caves: over 900 caves in a relatively small area, with over 100 km of caves in total. It is the first and the best studied evaporitic karst in the world, with academic work beginning in the 16th century. It also includes some of the deepest gypsum caves in existence, reaching 265 meters below the surface.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The Evaporitic Karst and Caves of Northern Apennines (EKCNA) constitute a globally exceptional, complete, outstanding and accessible example of the phenomenon of evaporitic karst formed in gypsum and anhydrite. Located in northern Italy, this serial property is situated in a very narrow belt of vertical cliffs emerging from surrounding clays.  It unites the first and best-studied evaporitic karst areas that have played a key role in the historical understanding of gypsum karst and evolution, and contributed to the early development of speleology, mineralogy and hydrogeology.

The evaporitic rocks of this property were deposited in two distinct geological periods: the breakup of the supercontinent Pangea (c. 200 million years ago), and during the ecological catastrophe when the Mediterranean Sea largely evaporated (c. 6 million years ago). The present cave systems developed in these two formations, over the last 500,000 years.

The property hosts examples of the mineralogical evolution of gypsum, including its transformation into anhydrite and alabaster, and many speleothems and minerals, reflecting complex relationships between rocks, hydrogeology and climate. The property has a very high density of caves, including some of the largest, deepest and most complex of their type. It also includes the evaporitic cave with the largest vertical drop in the world, the world’s largest surface water-formed karst cave and the largest karst salt spring in Europe.

Many caves have been explored since prehistoric times, and their associated historical values include being one of the first excavation areas of lapis specularis, stunning transparent crystals that were used as glass during Roman times.

Criterion (viii):  The property comprises a globally exceptional and complete illustration of gypsum-anhydrite karst systems. It can be considered as the area with the most well-studied, most accessible, more comprehensively displayed and better protected epigenic gypsum cave systems in the world. The property contains an exceptional diversity of well-documented chemical deposits and minerals associated with gypsum caves and karst. It also holds an outstanding density of caves in its relatively small area, with 900 caves totalling a combined length of over 100 km, including the longest epigenic cave in gypsum (11.5 km long, Spipola-Aquafredda-Prete Santo cave system), among the deepest known cave in gypsum in the world (-265 m) and one of the largest hydrogeological tunnels in gypsum worldwide (over 7 km long). The property also contains an unusually high density of superficial karst forms, the largest gypsum cones described (2 m in diameter and 2 m high), as well as salt springs, minerals, speleothems, and hypogean bends. It represents a complete collection of epigean and hypogean karst morphologies, from the dissolution surfaces in vertically exposed gypsum cliffs to the speleothems in the abysses of the caves.

Integrity

The property’s nine component parts are located in the extensive evaporitic rocks of the northern Apennine chain and ensure a complete representation of karst phenomena in gypsum and anhydrite. This includes the outcropping and underground karst areas, the main karst aquifers, and their recharge areas.

The state of conservation of the karst biotic and abiotic systems is excellent. The continuity of the karst hydrological system, above and below ground, is well preserved in all of the component parts. The few caves open to the public provide a high quality speleological experience, without alterations of the natural conditions and associated habitats.

Pressures from human settlements and development are low, although some component parts are close to metropolitan areas. Agriculture, where present, is limited, and the management of the remaining forests is aimed at conserving their undisturbed values as wild areas. Gypsum quarrying has affected the property, since Roman times, but is now prohibited.

It is nevertheless recognised that the boundaries of the property at the time of inscription require further adjustment to ensure that all of the attributes of Outstanding Universal Value are included within the inscribed area.    

Protection and management requirements

The evaporitic karst areas of the property are identified and strictly protected by a specific geological and speleological heritage protection act, and in accordance with European, national and regional regulations. The great majority (96%) of the property is protected by European Union directives and is part of the Natura 2000 Network. Most of the property (71%) is further protected by a national park and by two regional parks. The remaining areas are legally protected by nature reserves and protected landscapes.

The areas surrounding the property are subject to the territorial and landscape planning regulations of the Emilia-Romagna Region, which establish the framework for the management of the territory of the property and its surroundings. There is a need to ensure that the entire property, its attributes, and its buffer zones are subject to a complete, continuing and coherent legal protection regime targeting the property’s geological values, without any gaps in spatial coverage. Similarly, it will be important to ensure that the Appennino Tosco-Emiliano Biosphere Reserve zonation is aligned with the management of the component parts. A single unified protection system for all the component parts of the serial property, integrating the different systems in place at the time of inscription, will facilitate more effective management of the property.

At the time of inscription, the management system consisted of two bodies: the Appennino Tosco-Emiliano National Park and the Emilia-Romagna Region. The latter directly supervises the management bodies of the regional protected areas. These management bodies have a management plan, a specific budget and dedicated technical and administrative staff to manage and control the different protected areas.

A dedicated management structure orientated to World Heritage has been established upon inscription and the resulting finalised management strategy has been maintained and updated. This strategy includes a governance agreement that mutually commits the current management bodies to the conservation of the property (EKCNA Agreement), the establishment of a dedicated World Heritage coordination office (EKCNA focal point) and a shared action plan to ensure an effective long-term protection of the property’s natural values and attributes.

Key management requirements centre on the protection of the attributes and values of the geological heritage and conservation of the hydrological karst system.

It is important to ensure that the management requirements on which the inscription was based are clearly communicated and understood by all stakeholders, landowners and different management authorities. In addition, continuous and sufficient funding, specifically provided for the management of the serial World Heritage property, ensures the inclusion of effective and sufficient geoheritage and geoconservation knowledge and expertise. 

Protective status ensures that quarrying is prohibited within the property. To maintain the excellent state of conservation at the time of inscription, it is essential to ensure the restoration of former quarry sites. A guiding example at the time of inscription is the commitment not to extend the permit for quarrying in the Monte Tondo quarry, located in the buffer zone of the property, and to commence restoration activity as soon as practical. A visitor management plan is required to identify areas of expected high levels of visitation and define the carrying capacity for these areas.

The management of the property is complemented by effective geological and geomorphological education and interpretation programmes, and there is a need to ensure a continuously enhanced quality of visitor experience in the areas that are accessible to the public, including in the restored former quarry areas.

A long-term monitoring system involves surface and underground observation to evaluate the chemical and ecological state of karst aquifers, seismo-tectonic movements, and climate cave conditions. Key aspects of the property’s flora and fauna are also monitored, to inform the essential complementary conservation and protection measures for the important habitats and species within the property and its surroundings.

Italy
Date of Inscription: 2023
Criteria: (viii)
Property : 3,680 ha

Buffer zone: 8,348 ha
Dossier: 1692
Serial: yes

Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

Protections
by other conservation instruments

1 protection / 1 element

Biosphere Reserves (1 element)

Appennino Tosco-Emiliano

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026