World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Landscape of the Pico Island Vineyard Culture
Landscape of the Pico Island Vineyard Culture
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Landscape of the Pico Island Vineyard Culture

The 987-ha site on the volcanic island of Pico, the second largest in the Azores archipelago, consists of a remarkable pattern of spaced-out, long linear walls running inland from, and parallel to, the rocky shore. The walls were built to protect the thousands of small, contiguous, rectangular plots (currais) from wind and seawater. Evidence of this viniculture, whose origins date back to the 15th century, is manifest in the extraordinary assembly of the fields, in houses and early 19th-century manor houses, in wine-cellars, churches and ports. The extraordinarily beautiful man-made landscape of the site is the best remaining area of a once much more widespread practice.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis 

The Landscape of the Pico Island Vineyard Culture is an outstanding example of the adaptation of farming practices to a remote and challenging environment. Pico Island is one of nine volcanic islands in the Azores Archipelago in the Atlantic Ocean. The island contains spectacular evidence of grape-growing and wine-making (viniculture), with an imposing pattern of orderly, long, linear walls running inland from, and parallel to, the rocky coastline around its northern and western edges. The stone walls form thousands of small, contiguous, rectangular plots built to protect crops from wind and salt spray. Vines were, and continue to be, planted within the small and soilless plots (locally called currais). The extensive system of small fields, as well as the buildings (manor houses, wine cellars, warehouses, conventional houses, and churches), pathways and wells, ports and ramps, were produced by generations of farmers enabling the production of wine. 

Begun in the 15th century, wine production on Pico Island reached its peak in the 19th century and then gradually declined due to plant disease and desertification (loss of soil and reduced rainfall). However, a low level of grape vine growing and high-quality wine production continues to be undertaken and expanded, especially around the village of Criação Velha. Wine production is managed under a regime designed to ensure economic viability and sustainability as well as to retain traditional farming techniques. 

Criterion (iii): The Pico Island landscape reflects a unique response to viniculture on a small volcanic island that has been evolving since the arrival of the first settlers in the 15th century.

Criterion (v): The extraordinarily beautiful human-made landscape of small, stone walled fields is a testimony to generations of small-scale farmers who, in a hostile environment, created a sustainable living and much-valued wine. 

Integrity

The 987 ha property and its 1,924 ha buffer zone encompass all the elements necessary to understand the vineyard culture of Pico Island, which is the basis for its Outstanding Universal Value. The physical evidence across this landscape includes the extensive network of enclosed stone-walled fields, or currais, a variety of buildings (houses, wine cellars, windmills, warehouses, and churches), pathways, wells, ports, and fig trees. Its boundaries, including the buffer zone, represent a significant and intact proportion of the vineyard landscape, which encircled the island in the 19th century. The property comprises areas of both abandoned stone-walled enclosures (a relict cultural landscape) and areas where grape production continues to take place (a continuing, living and working landscape).

The vineyard landscape and culture of Pico Island is largely intact, extraordinarily well preserved, and without additions of intrusive modern structures. The abandoned, stone-walled enclosures suffer from a low level of deterioration resulting from disuse and neglect, while certain invasive plants species have colonised many of -these abandoned currais. Though currently maintained, the integrity of the Landscape of the Pico Island Vineyard Culture is threatened by the construction of new buildings that are incompatible with the visual qualities of the World Heritage property, and future development and expansion of the Pico airport risks impacting the Outstanding Universal Value of the property. 

Authenticity

The Landscape of the Pico Island Vineyard Culture has evolved over 500 years and is exceptionally well-preserved and fully authentic in its setting, materials, continued use, function, traditions, techniques, and management systems. The spectacular coastal setting of the viniculture landscape sits at the foothills of Pico Mountain, a volcano that dominates the topography of the island. The material used to construct the currais and buildings is largely composed of local, irregular, weatherworn, black basalt rocks. The use of this dominant material type is a major element of the authenticity of the cultural landscape. Part of the property (adjacent to Criação Velha, immediately south of the island’s main town of Madalena) is actively farmed. The currais in these areas are used in a way that is consistent with 19th-century techniques and traditions, thus fully satisfying conditions of authenticity.

The property is vulnerable to a number of pressures, which include the importing of stone for re-building that is not consistent with local materials. The expansion of the local wine-based industry (in part as a consequence of World Heritage status) is currently not considered a threat to the authenticity of the property, as viniculture practices are carried out by individual owner-farmers without the use of mechanical vine-growing methods. 

Protection and management requirements

The Landscape of the Pico Island Vineyard Culture is well protected through a system of legislation, management plans, and a multi-tired administrative system. Protection mechanisms are in place at the regional, island, municipal, and protected landscape levels.

Laws to protect both the vine growing areas and the standards of wine production on Pico Island were passed in 1980, 1988, and 1994. In 1986, the area covered by the World Heritage listing (as well as areas beyond the buffer zone) was classified as a Protected Landscape (IUCN Category V Protected Area, which are typical living landscapes). Regional Act of Law 10 of 2002 provides four levels of protection that include two zones for stone wall-enclosed vineyards or currais – the small lajidos (or broad lava flow fields) of Criação Velha and Santa  Luzia, which are areas protected for their high-quality wine production.

A series of management plans have been developed for the viniculture landscape of Pico Island, beginning with a ‘Safeguarding Plan’ (1993), an action plan (‘Dynamizing Plan,’ covering the period 2001-2006), and a regularly revised five-year Management Plan for the World Heritage property. The latter plan allowed the Regional Government to adopt measures to impose planning constraints on new buildings, use appropriate local building materials, reconstruct ruins, revitalise abandoned vineyards (e.g., remove invasive plants), and ‘guarantee the revitalisation of the landscape through the progressive increase of cultivated vines under traditional methods.’ The Management Plan views the property as a living, working landscape that is maintained and protected by sustaining the area’s distinctive wine-making traditions and thereby preserving the complex field patterns and associated structures and houses. A recent evaluation of the current ‘Land Management Plan of the Protected Landscape of Pico Vineyard Culture’ carried out by the Regional Directorate for the Environment will be the basis for revisions to the Management Plan. The purpose of the Plan is to “further promote the maintenance and recovery of the vineyard landscape, turning it into one of the most economic and social development hubs of Pico Island and the Azores.”

The multi-governmental, administrative structure is responsible for the management of the World Heritage property. The Azores Regional Directorate for the Environment is primarily responsible for law-making, management planning, and management implementation. A Management Committee, appointed by the Regional Secretary (Minister) for the Environment, is responsible for the property. The Pico Island Department of the Environment provides scientific expertise, while the municipal governments of Madalena (Criação Velha) and São Roque do Pico (Santa Luzia) exercise planning control (i.e. regulations relating to vine growing methods, local roads, and buildings).

Sustaining the Outstanding Universal Value of the Landscape of the Pico Island Vineyard Culture in the long-term will require ongoing coordination between the different levels of government in partnership with the local communities and land owners. The future protection of the 500-year old vineyard landscape will rely on continuing, effective, and realistic partnerships that support sustainable wine production in a way that continues to preserve traditional viniculture practices.
Links
Google Arts & Culture: Story

Sistema de Informação do Património Cultural (in Portuguese)

Comissão Nacional da UNESCO (in Portuguese)

Parques Naturais (in Portuguese)

Siaram (in Portuguese)

Direção-Geral do Património Cultural (in Portuguese)

Activities 3
Cultural Landscapes
The Mid-Atlantic Ridge
Culture|2030 Indicators National Profile of Portugal
News  2
International Day for Monuments and Sites 2021 - Complex Pasts: Diverse Futures
16 April 2021
Network of World Heritage Sites in Portugal created
1 August 2014
Media
play_arrow Landscape of the Pico Island Vineyard Culture (UNESCO/NHK)
Portugal
Date of Inscription: 2004
Criteria: (iii)(v)
Property : 987 ha

Buffer zone: 1,924 ha
Dossier: 1117rev
Serial: yes

Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
Protections
by other conservation instruments

1 protection / 1 element

Geoparks (1 element)

Azores UNESCO Global Geopark

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026