World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Royal Palaces of Abomey
Royal Palaces of Abomey
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Assistance
Royal Palaces of Abomey

From 1625 to 1900, 12 kings succeeded one another at the head of the powerful Kingdom of Abomey. With the exception of King Akaba, who had his own separate enclosure, they all had their palaces built within the same cob-wall area, in keeping with previous palaces as regards the use of space and materials. The royal palaces of Abomey are a unique reminder of this vanished kingdom.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The Royal Palaces of Abomey are the major material testimony to the Kingdom of Dahomey which developed from the mid-17th century in accordance with the precept enunciated by its founder, Wegbaja, “that the kingdom shall always be made greater”. Under the twelve kings who succeeded from 1625 to 1900, the kingdom established itself as one of the most powerful of the western coast of Africa. The site of the Royal Palaces of Abomey covers an area of 47 ha, and consists of a set of ten palaces, some of which are built next to each other and others which are superimposed, according to the succession to the throne. These palaces obey the principles relating to the culture Aja-Fon, and constitute not only the decision-making centre of the kingdom, but also the centre for the development of craft techniques, and storage for the treasures of the kingdom. The site consists of two parts since the palace of King Akaba is separated from that of his father Wegbaja by one of the main roads of the city and some residential areas. These two areas are enclosed by partially preserved cob walls. The palaces have organizational constants because each is surrounded by walls and built around three courtyards (outer, inner, private). The use of traditional materials and polychrome bas-reliefs are important architectural features. Today, the palaces are no longer inhabited, but those of King Ghézo and King Glélé house the Historical Museum of Abomey, which illustrates the history of the kingdom and its symbolism through a desire for independence, resistance and fight against colonial occupation.

Criterion (iii): The Royal Palaces of Abomey are a group of monuments of great historical and cultural value because of the conditions that led to their erection and the events they have witnessed. They are the living expression of a culture and an organized power, testimony to the glorious past of the kings who ruled the Kingdom of Dahomey from 1620 to 1900.

Criterion (iv): Organised as a series of courtyards of increasing importance, the access to each being provided by portals built astride the walls of the main enclosure, the Royal Palaces of Abomey are a unique architectural ensemble. These complex fortified structures illustrate the ingenuity developed by the royal power, from the mid-17th century, to comply with the precept laid down by the founder of the kingdom Wegbaja “that the kingdom shall always be made greater”.

Integrity

An inventory drawn up in 1995 with support from the World Heritage Centre identified and mapped 184 components. Similarly, the dimensions of the property were rectified from 44 to 47 ha, and its boundaries protected by a clearly defined buffer zone. Today, more than half of these components have been restored in accordance with accepted conservation standards and with the support of UNESCO and some partners of the State of Benin, including the royal families.

Authenticity

The authenticity of the site is based on the continuous functionality of the palaces.  The more-or-less regular celebration of traditional ceremonies and the organization of rehabilitation work on the buildings for special events, respecting traditional know-how, strengthen the authenticity of the site.  Furthermore, certain elements such as the Djexo (hut that houses the spirit of the king), Adoxo (tomb of the king) and other sacred places have always been given particular attention with regard to the respect of traditional materials. Laterite, water, wood, straw and traditional building techniques remain references for any intervention that should enable good transmission of this heritage to future generations. All in all, many initiatives have been taken in a dynamic perspective and with the logic of continuity of the tradition.

Protection and management requirements

The adoption and promulgation of Law No. 2007-20 of 23 August 2007 on the protection of cultural heritage and natural heritage of cultural significance in the Republic of Benin, and the decree on urban planning regulation of the buffer zone of the site listed by the City of Abomey in 2006, provide a secure framework for the protection of the property. In addition, the site of the Royal Palaces of Abomey has always included sacred spaces that are respected by the royal families and populations. The organisation of ritual ceremonies is another manner of appropriate safeguard.

The administrative, technical and participatory management of the site is regulated by decrees of the Minister of Culture.  In addition to the existence of a technical structure of daily management directed by the Site Manager, a Management Board involving all the stakeholders (city hall, populations, royal families, heritage specialists, State), enables dynamic participatory management of this property.  The activities undertaken on the site respect the provisions of the plan for the conservation, management and enhancement of the site. The precariousness of building materials used on the site, the human activities and the natural phenomena that might threaten the conservation status of the property are all elements that receive special attention through a risk management plan and a monitoring mechanism, with regard to both management issues and different means of intervention on the site.

Activities 3
World Heritage Earthen Architecture Programme (WHEAP)
The restoration of King Gbehanzin Palace – Royal Palaces of Abomey
Promoting the application of the Historic Urban Landscape (HUL) to safeguard heritage in the urban context in Africa: Tombs of Buganda Kings at Kasubi (Uganda) and Royal Palaces of Abomey (Benin)
News  11
UNESCO, ICCROM and EPA train African site managers on Disaster Risk Management strategies and Protection Systems
23 December 2024
The official launch of the regional project for capacity building in Risk management and protection systems in Africa
28 June 2021
Cultural Days in the Royal Palaces of Abomey (Benin)
19 February 2019
Communities and reinforcement of the management of the Royal Palaces of Abomey (Benin)
25 October 2018
More add
Events  1
[in French only] Le Roi s'en va-t-en guerre, Exposition gratuite aux Palais Royaux d'Abomey
8 Nov 2010 - 14 Nov 2010
Media
play_arrow Royal Palaces of Abomey (UNESCO/NHK)
Benin
Date of Inscription: 1985
Minor boundary modification inscribed year: 2007
Criteria: (iii)(iv)
Property : 47.6 ha

Buffer zone: 181.4 ha
Dossier: 323bis
Serial: yes

List of World Heritage in Danger

Inscription Year on the List of World Heritage in Danger

1985 -2007
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2025 2023 2021 2019 2017 2015 2014 2013 2012 2010 2008 2007 2006 2005 2004 2003 1998 1997 1995 1994 1985
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026