World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Petroglyphs along the Bangucheon Stream
Petroglyphs along the Bangucheon Stream
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Petroglyphs along the Bangucheon Stream
The property is located along the Bangucheon Stream on the Republic of Korea’s southeastern coast, spanning about three kilometers through a landscape of stratified cliffs. It features two significant rock art sites: the Daegok-ri and Cheonjeon-ri Petroglyphs. These panels contain dense concentrations of engravings created by successive generations from 5,000 BCE to the 9th century CE. Carved using stone and metal tools, the petroglyphs depict a wide range of imagery and reflect both prehistoric and historic cultural expressions.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The property is located along the Bangucheon Stream on the south-eastern coast of the Korean Peninsula. It extends for approximately three kilometres along this meandering waterway, in a landscape of stratified cliffs. Within this specific setting, there are two rock panels with remarkable concentrations of petroglyphs namely, the Daegok-ri Petroglyphs and the Cheonjeon-ri Petroglyphs. The petroglyphs depict a wide range of images engraved by successive generations of local artists, using stone and metal tools, spanning a period from the prehistoric to the historic eras, from 5,000 BCE to the 9th century CE.

The animals, human figures, hunting scenes, concentric circles, diamonds and writing carved into the rock show great realism and dynamism, while displaying a specific composition of figurative images and epigraphs. In particular, the petroglyphs representing animals, both aquatic and land-based, present a level of detail that makes it possible to discern the precise species of each animal.

These various images and inscriptions are an exceptional demonstration of this long tradition of rock engraving, extending from the Neolithic period through the Bronze Age and up to the Silla period.

Criterion (i): The Petroglyphs along the Bangucheon Stream display a wide range of images executed with great artistic mastery over the course of millennia by the coastal inhabitants of East Asia. The acute sense of observation reflected in the realistic depictions of various motifs and their specific compositions demonstrate the exceptional aesthetic sense of these artists. Their creativity is particularly evocative in prehistoric images depicting whales and certain stages of whaling, a subject only rarely represented in rock art around the world.

Criterion (iii): The Petroglyphs along the Bangucheon Stream attest to a tradition of rock carving that was practised for approximately 6,000 years within the landscape formed by the Bangucheon Stream. These rock carvings are exceptional because they demonstrate a complex form of artistic expression and concisely illustrate the cultural evolution of the coastal inhabitants of the peninsula over this long period. 

Integrity

The property includes all of the attributes that convey its Outstanding Universal Value. A dam constructed outside the southern boundary of the buffer zone has, in the past, created significant environmental pressures on one part of the petroglyphs of the property, but its negative impact has now been largely mitigated.

Authenticity

The property retains a high level of authenticity in its form and design, its materials and substance, location and setting. The dam outside the buffer zone caused some degree of topographical transformation, but this has been restored. Overall, the attributes expressing the Outstanding Universal Value of the property have been kept virtually intact until today.

Protection and management requirements

The property is protected under the Cultural Heritage Protection Act and other relevant laws, such as the Water Supply and Waterworks Installation Act and the Forest Protection Act. The property and its buffer zone are designated nationally as protected areas (under the category of Scenic Site). The two rock panels that have a high concentration of petroglyphs are also listed as National Treasures. Conservation and restoration projects for the property are carried out by specialist institutes and nationally certified professionals in order to preserve its integrity and authenticity.

The local government has established a dedicated property management body that is responsible for drawing up an integrated management plan, coordinating inputs from various stakeholders, and performing other tasks related to the management of the property. The local government is working to control the environmental pressures on one part of the property, particularly with regard to the potential drying out of the Daegok-ri panel due to the redevelopment of the Sayeon Dam. The central and local governments continuously monitor a number of physical and biological parameters to ensure that the state of conservation of the property is maintained.

Links
Petroglyphs along the Bangucheon Stream

News  1
UNESCO World Heritage: 26 new sites inscribed
17 July 2025
Republic of Korea
Date of Inscription: 2025
Criteria: (i)(iii)
Property : 43.69 ha

Buffer zone: 144.15 ha
Dossier: 1740
N35 36 30.42 E129 10 26.39
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026