World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Sian Ka'an
Sian Ka'an
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Assistance
Sian Ka'an

In the language of the Mayan peoples who once inhabited this region, Sian Ka'an means 'Origin of the Sky'. Located on the east coast of the Yucatán peninsula, this biosphere reserve contains tropical forests, mangroves and marshes, as well as a large marine section intersected by a barrier reef. It provides a habitat for a remarkably rich flora and a fauna comprising more than 300 species of birds, as well as a large number of the region's characteristic terrestrial vertebrates, which cohabit in the diverse environment formed by its complex hydrological system.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief Synthesis

Thousands of years ago the original Maya inhabitants appreciated the exceptional natural beauty of this stretch of coastline, naming it Sian Ka´an, or “Origin of the Sky". Located on the Eastern coast of the Yucatan Peninsula in the State of Quintana Roo, Sian Ka´an is one of Mexico's largest protected areas, established to manage 528,148 hectares of intricately linked marine, coastal and terrestrial ecosystems. Along its roughly 120 kilometres of coastline, the property covers over 400,000 hectares of land ranging from sea level to only ten m.a.s.l. The property boasts diverse tropical forests, palm savannah, one of the most pristine wetlands in the region, lagoons, extensive mangrove stands, as well as sandy beaches and dunes. The 120,000 hectares of marine area protect a valuable part of the Mesoamerican Barrier Reef and seagrass beds in the shallow bays. The lush green of the forests and the many shades of blue of the lagoons and the Caribbean Sea under a wide sky offer fascinating visual impressions.                 

The diversity of life in Sian Ka'an is exceptional. The tropical forests are home to charismatic mammals such as Jaguar, Puma, Ocelot and Central American Tapir. The property also provides habitat for a large number of resident and migratory bird species. There is a great diversity of marine life, including the West Indian Manatee, four species of nesting marine turtles and hundreds of fish species. About a third of the property is comprised of highly diverse and productive mangrove communities, of vital importance to fisheries in the broader region. Hundreds of forested islands, locally known as "Petenes", emerge from the flooded marshes, some reaching over a kilometre in diameter. A geological, biological and cultural particularity are the "Cenotes", deep natural sinkholes harbouring fascinating life forms, many of them endemic. This karst phenomenon results from collapsing limestone exposing groundwater.                            

Criterion (vii): The aesthetics and beauty of Sian Ka´an derive from the relatively undisturbed interface of sea and land along a well-conserved coastline. The mosaic of landscape elements is diverse in shapes, forms and colours allowing intriguing views and impressions. Noteworthy and rare natural phenomena include the "Cenotes", water-filled natural sinkholes hosting specialised communities of life and the "Petenes", tree islands emerging from the swamps. Both are connected by underground freshwater systems, jointly forming an invaluable and fragile treasure for future generations.

Criterion (x): The scale and conservation status of Sian Ka'an and its ecosystem diversity support a fascinating range of life forms. Over 850 vascular plants, including 120 woody species, have been confirmed in what is assumed to be a still incomplete inventory. In terms of fauna, noteworthy representatives among the more than 100 documented mammals include endangered species like Black-handed Spider Monkey, Yucatan Black Howler Monkey and the Central American Tapir. A small population of the vulnerable West Indian Manatee occurs in the coastal waters. Some 330 bird species have been recorded, 219 of them breeding in Sian Ka'an. Amphibians and reptiles are represented by more than 40 recorded species, among them the vulnerable American Crocodile and four of the six turtle species found along the Mexican coast, all reproducing within the property. The isolation of some of the "Cenotes" led to the evolution of several species which are locally endemic to single sinkholes. With some 80 recorded species of reef-building coral the portion of the Mesoamerican Reef within the property is one of the richest in Mexico. Jointly with the many other aquatic habitats it harbours more than 400 species of fish and a wealth of other marine life.

Integrity

The extensive property covers a large wetland complex, tropical forests, a diverse coastline, mangroves and a fascinating marine area with noteworthy corals and seagrass beds, all in a good overall state of conservation. Large tracts of the dense forests, mangroves and marshland are difficult to access and the poor soils and the vulnerability to storms and flooding have contributed to maintaining the mosaic of ecosystems. Many of the boundaries coincide with landscape features, such as the natural edge of the marshes in the South-East or the limits of the Espiritu Santo Bay catchment in the South. In the ocean, a depth of 50 metres has been defined as the Eastern boundary of Sian Ka'an. The property is of great importance to support the continuity of the intricate connections between terrestrial, marine and freshwater ecosystems and their rich flora and fauna. Sian Ka'an embraces a self-protecting system that is characteristic of the coast of the Yucatan Peninsula: the Mesoamerican Reef shelters the landward mangroves and seagrass beds, while the mangroves trap sediments, filter pollution and serve as nurseries for many vertebrates and invertebrates in the reef. In other words, these major landscape and seascape features are of vital importance to each other. It is therefore indispensable to consider them jointly in management and conservation, as is the case in Sian Ka'an. The contiguity with the almost 90,000 hectares protected as Uaymil Flora and Fauna Protection Area to the South and other important marine and terrestrial protected areas nearby likewise contribute to the integrity of Sian Ka'an.

Requirements for protection and management

After the historic abandonment of the area, inaccessibility, frequent flooding and poor soils allowed for centuries of natural regeneration, until governmental schemes encouraged timber extraction and land clearing for cattle pastures in the 20th Century. The undesired effects of uncontrolled development led to the creation of a nature reserve in 1982, consolidated in 1986 when the area was categorized a national biosphere reserve by Presidential Decree and also internationally recognised. More recently, Sian Ka'an was also recognised as part of a vast Wetland of International Importance under the Ramsar Convention. The large property is federally owned with the exception of a small patch of private land of around one percent of the total area on the Northern coast. Today, Mexico's National Protected Areas Agency (CONANP) under the Ministry of the Environment (SEMARNAT) is in charge of management, cooperating with partners at all levels of government. A management programme is to guide all activities and zoning. The involvement of local communities, governmental representatives, Academia and non-governmental organisations in management is promoted through an Advisory Council.

Sian Ka'an is susceptible to frequent and heavy tropical storms. The barrier reef provides natural protection for the coast, a telling example of conservation contributing to disaster preparedness. As for human impacts, the inaccessibility protects large tracts of the property. Besides the coastal fishing villages of Punta Allen and Punta Herrero, there are few permanent residents in the property. Hunting, fishing and collection of forest products, however, are widespread. Sport fishing and commercial fishing to supply nearby tourism centres has resulted in marked declines of some species, notably the Spiny Lobster. Management responses are needed. Agriculture north of the property bears pollution risks pollution and fires set to clear land have repeatedly spread into the property. Alien invasive species are reported, mostly along the dirt tracks on land but also in the ocean. The main economic sector directly and indirectly impacting on the property, however, is tourism. Fishing lodges and clubs, small hotels, cabins and trailer parks are the visible manifestations within the property. Tourism has reached proportions of mass tourism along parts of the Yucatan Coast and the property is in the vicinity of Tulum and Cancun, two of Yucatan’s major tourist attractions. Associated coastal urbanisation with, for example, well-documented garbage and sewage problems, require monitoring and management responses. Attempts to encourage low impact forms of tourism in the property to promote public awareness and visitor education but also as a source of conservation funding deserves consolidation.

Links
 View photos from OUR PLACE the World Heritage collection

Protectedplanet.net

Activities 4
World Heritage Marine Programme
Linking Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Tourism at World Heritage Sites
Case study: Sian Ka'an
Culture|2030 Indicators National Profile of the Mexico
News  4
Ocean: UNESCO launches emergency plan to boost World Heritage-listed reefs’ resilience
14 April 2022
Marine World Heritage-inspired artwork to celebrate World Oceans Day
8 June 2018
Spearheading a global conservation movement: Marine World Heritage 2018 annual report
6 February 2018
Children call on world leaders to save the ocean, launch #My Ocean Pledge campaign at World Oceans Day event
8 June 2017
Events  1
Mexico's World Heritage Sites Photographic Exhibition at UN Headquarters
24 Feb 2006 - 28 Feb 2006
Media
play_arrow NHK World Heritage 100 Series
play_arrow Sian Ka'an (UNESCO/NHK)
play_arrow UNESCO Marine World Heritage and COVID-19 (Part II)
Mexico
Date of Inscription: 1987
Criteria: (vii)(x)
Property : 528,000 ha

Dossier: 410
Quintana Roo, Cozumel et Felipe Carrillo Puerto
N19 22 59.988 W87 47 30.012
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2004 2003 2002 2001
Protections
by other conservation instruments

2 protections / 2 elements

Biosphere Reserves (1 element)

Sian Ka'an
RAMSAR (1 element)

Sian Ka'an

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026