World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Plantin-Moretus House-Workshops-Museum Complex
Plantin-Moretus House-Workshops-Museum Complex
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Plantin-Moretus House-Workshops-Museum Complex

The Plantin-Moretus Museum is a printing plant and publishing house dating from the Renaissance and Baroque periods. Situated in Antwerp, one of the three leading cities of early European printing along with Paris and Venice, it is associated with the history of the invention and spread of typography. Its name refers to the greatest printer-publisher of the second half of the 16th century: Christophe Plantin (c. 1520–89). The monument is of outstanding architectural value. It contains exhaustive evidence of the life and work of what was the most prolific printing and publishing house in Europe in the late 16th century. The building of the company, which remained in activity until 1867, contains a large collection of old printing equipment, an extensive library, invaluable archives and works of art, among them a painting by Rubens.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The Plantin-Moretus House-Workshops-Museum Complex is the only surviving printing workshop and publishing house in the world dating back to the Renaissance and Baroque periods. Situated in Antwerp, one of the three leading cities of early European printing along with Paris and Venice, it is associated with the history of the invention and dissemination of typography. Its name refers to the greatest printer-publisher of the second half of the 16th century, Christophe Plantin (c. 1520-1589), and his son-in-law, Jan Moretus I (1543-1610), who took over the best-equipped printing company in Europe upon Plantin’s death. It was thanks to the Moretus family that the firm’s production activities continued in the same location for three centuries, from 1576 to 1867. Ten years later, the Complex was opened as a museum dedicated to presenting the relationship between the living environment of the family, the world of work, and the world of commerce during the 16th, 17th, and 18th centuries.

The Complex evolved over the centuries to include a patrician mansion as well as north, south, west, and east wings, added to the 1576-1580 core in three phases (1578-1584, 1620-1640, and 1760-1763), creating an interior courtyard. In addition to its outstanding architectural value, the Complex contains exhaustive evidence of the life and work of what was the most prolific printing and publishing house in Europe in the late 16th century. Within its walls are the  equipment of the workshops (printing-press, foundry, typesetting room), the furnishings that have remained in situ (equipment, tools, an extensive library, furniture, portraits), the invaluable business archives of the Officina Plantiniana (inscribed in UNESCO’s Memory of the World Register of documentary heritage in 2001), and works of art, including paintings from the workshop of Rubens. 

Criterion (ii): Through the publications of the Officina Plantiniana, the Plantin-Moretus Complex is a testimony to the major role played by this important centre of 16th-century European humanism in the development of science and culture.

Criterion (iii): Considered as an integral part of the Memory of the World (UNESCO, 2001), the Plantinian Archives, including the business archives of the Officina, the books of commercial accounts and the correspondence with a number of world-renowned scholars and humanists, provide an outstanding testimony to a cultural tradition of the first importance.

Criterion (iv): As an outstanding example of the relationship between the living environment of a family during the 16th, 17th and 18th centuries, the world of work and the world of commerce, the Plantin-Moretus Complex is of unrivalled documentary value relating to significant periods of European history: the Renaissance, the Baroque and Classicism.

Criterion (vi): The Plantin-Moretus Complex is tangibly associated with ideas, beliefs, technologies and literary and artistic works of outstanding universal significance. 

Integrity

All the elements necessary to express the Outstanding Universal Value of the Plantin-Moretus House-Workshops-Museum Complex are located within the boundaries of the 0.23 ha property, including the Complex’s central nucleus built in 1576-1580 and its later additions, the equipment of the workshops, the furnishings, the archives, and the works of art associated with the Plantin-Moretus family and business. The boundaries of the property thus adequately ensure the complete representation of the features and processes that convey the property’s significance. There is a 184.1 ha buffer zone.

Overall, the property has retained its integrity, with regard to its characteristics and components. The original house and its historical additions are well preserved. In the last century, two important interventions were carried out: a new wing was added in 1937 to house a collection of graphic art; and the Complex was restored in 1947 after the 1576-1580 core and the east wing were damaged by a missile in 1945. The property does not suffer from adverse effects of development and/or neglect. 

Authenticity

The Plantin-Moretus House-Workshops-Museum Complex is authentic in terms of its location and setting, forms and design, and materials and substances. Each of the phases of the Complex – the central nucleus and its later additions– is an authentic testimony to the architecture and lifestyle of its period. This authenticity is reflected in the continuing existence in the same places (mansion and workshops) of the same activity (printing/publishing) carried out by the same family (the Moretus family, descendants of the son-in-law of Christophe Plantin, the founder).

In formal terms, the restoration required for the ongoing upkeep of the buildings, and those made necessary by war damage (in 1945), have not affected the authenticity of the ensemble. The same applies to the museographic installations, which are fully in keeping with the historical evolution of the monument. 

Protection and management requirements

The Plantin-Moretus House-Workshops-Museum Complex, which is owned by the City of Antwerp, was listed as a national monument on 25 March 1938 (façade and courtyard), with an extension of the protection to the whole building complex, including its interior, on 10 July 1997. As a consequence of this listing, every intervention concerning the Plantin-Moretus House-Workshops-Museum Complex must be approved by the regional monuments and sites administration. This is also the case for a number of listed buildings in the immediate surroundings of the Complex. The management of the property is the responsibility of the chief curator of the museum, appointed by the City of Antwerp. In view of the importance and composition of its collection, its management policy is supervised by the Fine Arts and Museum Division of the government of Flanders. As a listed monument, the management of the museum is governed by the Flanders Heritage Agency. There is a management plan.

Sustaining the Outstanding Universal Value of the property over time will require maintaining and improving, as required, the conservation and management of the property and its collections (archives, books, and historic interiors). The attributes that express the Outstanding Universal Value of the property are protected when undertaking any interventions, such as improving access or enhancing the comfort of visitors.

Links
Google Arts & Culture: Story

Museum Plantin-Moretus

Activities 1
World Heritage Cities Programme
News  2
Five World Heritage sites in Azerbaijan and Belgium granted “enhanced protection” in the event of armed conflict
20 December 2013
Mostar, Macao and Biblical vestiges in Israel are among the 17 cultural sites inscribed on UNESCO’s World Heritage List
15 July 2005
Events  1
Plantin-Moretus House-Workshops-Museum Complex Celebrates Inscription on World Heritage List
30 January 2006
Media
play_arrow Plantin-Moretus House-Workshops-Museum Complex (UNESCO/NHK)
Belgium
Date of Inscription: 2005
Criteria: (ii)(iii)(iv)(vi)
Property : 0.23 ha

Buffer zone: 184.1 ha
Dossier: 1185
City of Antwerp, Flanders Region
N51 13 5.988 E4 23 52.008
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
Protections
by other conservation instruments

2 protections / 2 elements

Geoparks (1 element)

Schelde Delta UNESCO Global Geopark
Second Protocol to the 1954 Hague Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict (1 element)

The Plantin-Moretus House-Workshops-Museum Complex and the Business Archives of the Officina Plantiniana

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026