World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Bourges Cathedral
Bourges Cathedral
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Bourges Cathedral

The Cathedral of St Etienne of Bourges, built between the late 12th and late 13th centuries, is one of the great masterpieces of Gothic art and is admired for its proportions and the unity of its design. The tympanum, sculptures and stained-glass windows are particularly striking. Apart from the beauty of the architecture, it attests to the power of Christianity in medieval France.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Bourges, the ancient Roman city of Avaricum, located in the Centre-Val-de-Loire region, was one of the first Christian communities of Gaul. The cathedral, which was dedicated to the first Christian martyr, Saint Etienne, occupies the site of a place of worship since the 3rd century. Built between the late 12th and late 13th centuries, it is one of the great masterpieces of Gothic art, and admired for its proportions and the unity of its design. Its tympanum, sculptures and stained-glass windows are particularly striking. Apart from the beauty of its architecture, it bears witness to the power of Christianity in medieval France.

The plan of the cathedral is simple and harmonious. It is a basilica with five naves and chapels surrounding the choir. Double flying buttresses allow for the absence of tribunes and provide equal luminosity throughout the nave and the side aisles.

The most remarkable characteristics of the cathedral are the perspective of the lateral walls and the unity of the interior space. The sculptures on the north and south doors, on the tympanum of the Door of the Last Judgement (at the centre of the west façade) and others like the sculpted rood screen comprise outstanding examples of Gothic art. The following centuries left their mark on the cathedral: the stained-glass windows hence comprise a true encyclopaedia of this art of the 14th, 15th and 16th centuries.

Criterion (i): Bourges Cathedral is of considerable importance in the development of Gothic architecture and as a symbol of the strength of Christianity in medieval France. However, its principal claim lies in its striking beauty, combining masterly management of space with harmonious proportions and decoration of the highest quality.

Criterion (iv): Although Bourges Cathedral lies outside the mainstream of the French Gothic, represented by St Denis, Paris, Chartres or Amiens, it strongly influenced the architectural values of cathedrals of this style. With the unity of its design, the skilful articulation of its spaces and the treatment of light, it represents an outstanding expression of style applied to this type of edifice.

Integrity                                                                                                             

The design of Bourges Cathedral has been respected and has remained unaltered over the centuries. It retains the integrity of its plan and design and all its attributes have been preserved intact. Located in a protected urban environment, the property has experienced no threat.

Authenticity

The shape and materials of the building are as they were when it was completed in the late 13th century, although its maintenance and the evolution of the religion have necessitated the replacement of numerous elements as is the case with all Gothic cathedrals. All the restoration work has respected the original techniques and construction materials.

Protection and management requirements

Property of the State, managed in part by the National Monuments Centre, Bourges Cathedral has been listed as Historic Monument since 1862. As such, it enjoys conservation provisions as defined and directly executed by the Ministry of Culture and Communication.

Legally of the Catholic religion, the cathedral cannot be used for any other worship. The crypt and the terrace of the north tower receive about 30,000 visitors each year.

The buffer zone of the property, adopted in 2013, comprises two regulatory protective measures: on the one hand, the protection of its boundaries through its listing as Historic Monument, and on the other, the safeguarding and enhancement plan approved in 1994, for the outstanding heritage site corresponding to the acquisition of the medieval city. The marsh land located to the north-east of the edifice, the result of industrious work by the clergy to drain and cultivate this vast territory, was listed along with the sites. 

Links
Bourges

tour et crypte de la Cathédrale de Bourges (in French)

The St.Etienne's Cathedral

Media
play_arrow Bourges Cathedral (UNESCO/NHK)
France
Date of Inscription: 1992
Minor boundary modification inscribed year: 2013
Criteria: (i)(iv)
Property : 0.85 ha

Buffer zone: 105 ha
Dossier: 635bis
Department of Cher, Centre Region
N47 4 56 E2 23 54
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

Protections
by other conservation instruments

1 protection / 1 element

2003 Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage (1 element)

Scribing tradition in French timber framing

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026