World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
The Porticoes of Bologna
The Porticoes of Bologna
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
The Porticoes of Bologna

The serial property comprises twelve component parts consisting of ensembles of porticoes and their surrounding built areas, located within the Municipality of Bologna from the 12th century to the present. These portico ensembles are considered to be the most representative among city’s porticoes, which cover a total stretch of 62 km. Some of the porticoes are built of wood, others of stone or brick, as well as reinforced concrete, covering roads, squares, paths and walkways, either on one or both sides of a street. The property includes porticoed buildings that do not form a structural continuum with other buildings and therefore are not part of a comprehensive covered walkway or passage. The porticoes are appreciated as sheltered walkways and prime locations for merchant activities. In the 20th century, the use of concrete allowed the replacement of the traditional vaulted arcades with new building possibilities and a new architectural language for the porticoes emerged, as exemplified in the Barca district. Together, the selected porticoes reflect different typologies, urban and social functions and chronological phases. Defined as private property for public use, the porticoes have become an expression and element of Bologna’s urban identity. 

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The porticoes of Bologna are a selection of 12 porticoes that reflect the different architectural typologies found in the overall 62km of Bologna’s porticoed pathways, the largest porticoe system in the world. The 12 component parts enshrine the typologies, architectural features, urban and social functions that characterized the progressive enlargement of porticoed pathways, in both central and peripheral areas of the city, with the sustained renewal of a centuries old tradition launched with the 1288 Statute.

The public portico, as a model of a particularly active social life at any time and in any climatic condition, is a very ancient model typology, an element adopted for centuries throughout the world. It finds in Bologna an exceptional and complete representation from the chronological, typological and functional point of view. It is an architectural model but also a social one, a place of integration and exchange, in which the main protagonists of the city (citizens, migrants and students) live and share time and ideas, relationships and thoughts. It is a reference point for a sustainable urban lifestyle, where civil and religious spaces and residences of all social classes are perfectly integrated: a place of continuous interchange of human values that permeates and shapes city life. This is the reason for which people who passed by Bologna over the centuries have appreciated and praised the portico, which is why the porticoed model was continuously exported elsewhere in Italy and Europe.

The attributes that convey the Outstanding Universal Value of the property are: the complex of different porticoes typologies and their relationship with surrounding urban areas, the evolution of their form, design and materials, the public use of porticoes and their social function for a sustainable urban lifestyle, places of continuous interchange of human values, civil and religious, and the interconnections of the component parts with the wider porticoes system of covered walkways within the perimeter of the property.

In Bologna the porticoes are the exceptional result of an urban planning regulatory framework. This regulatory framework has favoured the creation of an architectural typology that has developed in various peculiar ways in the city of Bologna over the course of nine centuries. The persistence of the legislation regulates the protection, conservation, use and management of the porticoes.

Finally, these covered spaces, which still remain private property for public use, have developed social and community significance. For these characteristics, the community, but also the visitors, have recognized and still recognize today the porticoes as an identifying feature of the city.

Criterion (iv): The series of Bologna’s porticoes represents in an exemplary manner an architectural typology of ancient origin and wide diffusion, never abandoned until today, but in continuous change through precise historical periods of the town’s transformation. The series was selected in the context of the wider porticoed system that permeates the old historical city. The property represents a variety of porticoed building typologies which characterized the houses of the working class, the aristocratic residences, the public and the religious buildings. Historical and contemporary construction employ a wide range of building materials, technologies and styles, as a result of the progressive city’s expansion and mutations since the 12th century.

Integrity

The 12 component parts of the serial property, as a whole, are representative of the wider portico network in the city, including all the attributes necessary to support its Outstanding Universal Value. The chronological integrity of the property lies in the continuity of construction and maintenance of the porticoes in the city of Bologna from the 12th to the 21st century. The functional integrity of the various uses associated with the porticoes was maintained even considering the transformations and developments of the city over the centuries. The structural integrity is regularly monitored, both from the morphological and architectural point of view. The characteristics of the property's original construction are clearly identifiable, although they have undergone restoration or reconstruction over the centuries. The Italian legislation framework, made up of national, regional and local protective designation, contributes to the correct conservation and enhancement of the porticoes, sometimes as separate elements, sometimes as a portion of a larger whole, also contributing to the maintenance of the visual integrity. There is no evidence of pressure that damages the integrity of the property.

Authenticity

Historical iconography, paintings, engravings, design drawings, as well as many vintage photographs illustrate each component part of the serial property, contributing knowledge of form and design, construction techniques, materials, sometimes even the name of the designers. This vast documentary heritage illustrates how Bologna has recurrently built new porticoed areas, according to the urban transformations that changed the city over time. The outstanding continuity of the portico tradition contributed to the selection of the component parts in the series, and explains how the features of each component contributes to the Outstanding Universal Value of the property.

The historical development of the porticoed system is perfectly legible in its 12 component parts. The actual layout and building materials of each component maintains the same characteristics of the original construction, and faithfully reflects the progressive stages of the city urban development. The regulations in force protect the authenticity of the property even where restoration works had to be implemented. The skilful use of durable materials, primarily stone, ensured the physical preservation over the centuries, and the extraordinary state of conservation of most of the selected porticoes.

Bologna was one of the most bombed Italian cities during the Second World War. Therefore, in order to meet the requirements of authenticity, the selection of the 12 component parts had to feature the porticoes which were least affected by war damage. In the few cases when some damage occurred, the restoration has always carefully respected the principle or the restoration theory.

Functional authenticity was always maintained. Thanks to the standard set in the legal Statute of 1288, the construction of porticoes and their function as privately owned public space, has been a constant of the city urban growth from the end of the 13th century until today. The porticoes are architectural elements that relate both to the surrounding public space and to the building they are part of. The public-private management system (private property, public use) has been maintained and implemented over the centuries. The authenticity of the spirit and feeling of the property materializes in the social life of porticoes as the sites where many activities defining the urban identity of the city take place.

Protection and management requirements

The property is completely protected by a protective designation at different levels. At national level, the Code for Cultural Heritage and Landscape regulates the protection of most buildings in the property as public heritage. This measure entails an essential duty of conservation and, as a safeguard measure, it binds all activities on the building to obtain the authorization of the Ministry of Culture local office. Some of the porticoes belonging to the selected component parts have been identified by the Code as areas of “notable public interest" from the landscape point of view. The Regional Law no. 24/2017 governs the historic centre in accordance with some core principles. These principles forbid any modification to the road system, the open spaces and the historical buildings, and they require the preservation of the uses.  Locally, the level of protection is very high, thanks to planning and protection measures at municipal level. In fact, nowadays, and since the 1288 Statute, the maintenance and management of the property remain under the responsibility of the individual owners of the porticoed buildings, while the municipality sets the rules for construction, access and decoration, to protect the urban quality and the collective usability of these spaces.

The Steering Committee coordinated by the Municipality of Bologna manages the property's governance system. It includes the main bodies and parties responsible for the management, protection and enhancement of the property. These bodies signed a specific Memorandum of Understanding, jointly prepared the property management plan, and are responsible for its implementation, monitoring and updating. The Municipality of Bologna has also set up a dedicated office, Portici Patrimonio Mondiale, which deals, from the technical-operational point of view and in coordination with the Steering Committee, with the issues closely related to the management, enhancement, protection of the property, and of all the porticoes in the city. The Municipality has prepared guidelines “Porticoes. Instruction for care and use" that regulate the usage of any accessory elements of the porticoes, therefore maintaining their visual integrity and authenticity.

Activities 2
World Heritage Cities Programme
Developing a new methodology for urban regeneration: the ROCK project in Bologna (Italy)
News  1
World Heritage Committee inscribes four cultural and one natural site on UNESCO’s World Heritage List
28 July 2021
Italy
Date of Inscription: 2021
Criteria: (iv)
Property : 52.18 ha

Buffer zone: 1,125.62 ha
Dossier: 1650
Serial: yes

Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2025 2023
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026