World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
The Cosmological Axis of Yogyakarta and its ...
The Cosmological Axis of Yogyakarta and its Historic Landmarks
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
The Cosmological Axis of Yogyakarta and its Historic Landmarks
The central axis of Yogyakarta was established in the 18th century by Sultan Mangkubumi, and has continued from that time as a centre of government and Javanese cultural traditions. The six kilometre north-south axis is positioned to link Mount Merapi and the Indian Ocean, with the Kraton (palace) at its centre, and key cultural monuments lining the axis to the north and south that are connected through rituals. It embodies key beliefs about the cosmos in Javanese culture, including the marking of the cycles of life.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The Cosmological Axis of Yogyakarta and its Historic Landmarks includes the Kraton (Palace) Complex and a series of linked landmarks, monuments and spaces located along a six-kilometre-long south-north axis in central Yogyakarta. The property is an exceptional testimony to Javanese civilisation and culture, and exhibits an important interchange between diverse belief systems and values.

The orientation of the axis and the placement of the landmarks along its length were designed to manifest in physical form the Javanese philosophical thoughts on human life, especially the cycle of life (Sangkan Paraning Dumadi), ideal harmonious life (Hamemayu Hayuning Bawana), the connection between human beings and the Creator (Manunggaling Kawula Gusti), and the microcosmic and macrocosmic worlds. The landmarks are connected spatially, in their design, through rituals, and by the traditional management system of the Sultanate of Ngayogyakarta Hadiningrat known as Tata Rakiting Wewangunan. The axis is aligned between Mount Merapi, considered the abode of Guardian Spirits, and the Indian Ocean, regarded as the home of the Queen of the Southern Sea, reflected in the shape and meaning of the northernmost and southernmost monuments that define the axis.

The location of the Kraton and the city were chosen by the Sultan Mangkubumi in 1755 to conform to Javanese cosmological beliefs, where the capital of the Kingdom is considered to be a miniature of the universe following the Hindu-Buddhist concepts of the physical, metaphysical and spiritual universes. These concepts pre-date the property itself, shaped through the history of Java since before the 1st century CE.

The attributes of the property have been identified and include both tangible and intangible aspects. The latter include cultural heritage practices relating to the cycle of life (birth, marriage and death), venerating ancestors, coronations, funerals, Islamic days, the connection of the natural and macrocosmic microcosmic worlds, and day to day offerings.

Criterion (ii): The Cosmological Axis of Yogyakarta and its Historic Landmarks exhibits an important interchange of human values and ideas between different belief systems related to Javanese animism and ancestor worship, Hinduism and Buddhism from India, Sufi Islam from either India or the Middle East, and Western influences, which were adapted and integrated into the beliefs and culture of the Mataram Kingdoms over hundreds of years. This important and complex interchange of values is demonstrated by the tangible and intangible attributes of the cultural ensemble evident in the property’s spatial planning, architecture and monuments, as well as ceremonies and festivals.

Criterion (iii): The Cosmological Axis of Yogyakarta and its Historic Landmarks bears an exceptional testimony to Javanese civilisation and living cultural traditions after the 16th century. The Sultanate of Ngayogyakarta Hadiningrat remains the centre for Javanese civilisation and its maintenance and development through the cultural traditions and practices including governance, customary law (paugeran), arts, literature, festivals, and ceremonies. The property is associated with Javanese rituals relating to the cycle of life, venerating ancestors, coronations and royal occasions, Islamic days, and connection with the forces of nature. The Tata Rakiting Wewangunan concept has its origins in Mataram Royal courts since the 16th century and refers to the holistic management of the tangible and intangible aspects of the Sultanate of Ngayogyakarta Hadiningrat, including the uses of space along the axis and in the Kraton Complex.

Integrity

The property includes all of the tangible and intangible attributes necessary to express its Outstanding Universal Value. Most of the attributes are in a good state of conservation, and actions have been implemented to address continuing pressures including urban development and tourism infrastructure. In the past, damage has occurred through earthquakes, wars and inappropriate urban development, particularly high-rise buildings, including hotels along the Northern Axis. Informal settlements along parts of the Kraton outer walls have also impacted on the condition of the property, and a voluntary scheme to support relocation of the residents has been established.

Authenticity

The authenticity of the attributes of Outstanding Universal Value of the property is satisfactory through their form and design, materials, uses, traditions and management system, location and setting, intangible heritage, and spirit and feeling. Many repairs and modifications have occurred through time, and some reconstructions have occurred in response to damage caused by the 1867 and 2006 earthquakes, and the Beringharjo Market was rebuilt as an Art Deco concrete structure in the 1920s. The approach to maintenance and conservation are appropriate to sustain the authenticity, although greater caution with the use of non-traditional materials is needed. The traditional management in place for this property is an added support to sustaining the authenticity.

Protection and management requirements

The Cosmological Axis of Yogyakarta and its Historic Landmarks is protected at the national level according to Law of the Republic of Indonesia Number 11 of 2010 concerning Cultural Property. Based on this law, the Ministry of Education and Culture has designated the Kraton and its surrounding area as a National Cultural Property Area (Decree of the Minister of Education and Culture No. 117 of 2018) and as National Cultural Property.

At the regional level, the Governor of the Special Region of Yogyakarta has designated the property, buffer zone and wider setting as a Provincial Cultural Heritage Area. A heritage impact assessment mechanism has operated at the property since 2012 and has been further strengthened through the regional law and guidelines on heritage impact assessments which was legally adopted in 2022. The Special Provincial Regulation No. 5 of 2019 concerning Spatial Land-use Plan for 2019-2039 provides additional protection for the property, and regulates the height, location, and density of buildings.

The property is also protected through traditional and modern management systems, under the overall coordination of the Cosmological Axis of Yogyakarta Management Unit. The Management Unit has a dedicated staff and budget and is responsible for the implementation of the Management Plan. The Unit also coordinates all stakeholders including the local Community Working Groups.

The Joint Secretariat for the Management of the Sultanate is chaired by the Sultan of Ngayogyakarta Hadiningrat who is also the Governor of the Special Region of Yogyakarta and is responsible for the overall strategic management of the property. All key government agencies responsible for the management of the property are included.

The Sultanate of the Ngayogyakarta Hadiningrat implements the Tata Rakiting Wewangunan traditional management system through an administrative structure called Tata Rakiting Paprentahan. This is led by the Sultan and consists of units run by the Abdi Dalem (Royal Courtiers). The Kraton is managed under this system.

Links
The Cosmological Axis of Yogyakarta and its Historic Landmarks

Indonesia
Date of Inscription: 2023
Criteria: (ii)(iii)
Property : 42.22 ha

Buffer zone: 291.17 ha
Dossier: 1671
S7 48 5 E110 21 53.2
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026