World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Old town of Regensburg with Stadtamhof
Old town of Regensburg with Stadtamhof
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Old town of Regensburg with Stadtamhof

Located on the Danube River in Bavaria, this medieval town contains many buildings of exceptional quality that testify to its history as a trading centre and to its influence on the region from the 9th century. A notable number of historic structures span some two millennia and include ancient Roman, Romanesque and Gothic buildings. Regensburg’s 11th- to 13th-century architecture – including the market, city hall and cathedral – still defines the character of the town marked by tall buildings, dark and narrow lanes, and strong fortifications. The buildings include medieval patrician houses and towers, a large number of churches and monastic ensembles as well as the 12th-century Old Bridge. The town is also remarkable for the vestiges testifing to its rich history as one of the centres of the Holy Roman Empire that turned to Protestantism.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Located on the Danube River, the Old Town of Regensburg with Stadtamhof is an exceptional example of a central-European medieval trading centre, which illustrates an interchange of cultural and architectural influences. The property encompasses the city centre on the south side of the river, two long islands in the Danube, the so-called Wöhrde (from the old German word: waird, meaning island or peninsula), and the area of the former charity hospital St Katharina in Stadtamhof, a district incorporated into the city of Regensburg only in 1924. A navigable canal, part of the European waterway of the Rhine-Main-Danube canal, forms the northern boundary of Stadtamhof.

A notable number of buildings of outstanding quality testify to its political, religious, and economic significance from the 9th century. The historic fabric reflects some two millennia of structural continuity and includes ancient Roman, Romanesque, and Gothic buildings. Regensburg's 11th to 13th century architecture still defines the character of the town marked by tall buildings, dark and narrow lanes, and strong fortifications. The buildings include medieval Patrician houses and towers, a large number of churches and monastic ensembles as well as the 12th century Stone Bridge.

The town is also remarkable as a meeting place of Imperial Assemblies and as the seat of the Perpetual Imperial Diet general assemblies until the 19th century. Numerous buildings testify to its history as one of the centres of the Holy Roman Empire, like the Patrician towers, large Romanesque and Gothic church buildings and monasteries – St Emmeram, Alte Kapelle, Niedermünster and St Jakob - as well as the cathedral St Peter and the late Gothic town hall.

Criterion (ii): The architecture of Regensburg represents the city's role as a medieval trading centre and its influence in the region north of the Alps. Regensburg was an important transition point on continental trade routes to Italy, Bohemia, Russia and Byzantium. It also had multiple connections with the transcontinental Silk Roads. As such, the city exhibits an important interchange of cultural and architectural influences, which have shaped its urban landscape.

Criterion (iii): The Old Town of Regensburg bears an exceptional testimony to cultural traditions especially in the Holy Roman Empire, being the location for most of the assemblies of the Empire in the High Middle Ages. Regensburg also significantly contributed to more recent European history being the seat of the Perpetual Assembly from 1663 to 1806. As a testimony to these functions, there are the remains of two imperial Palatine palaces from the 9th century, and a large number of other well preserved historic buildings, which are testimony to the wealth and political importance of the community.

Criterion (iv): The Old Town of Regensburg with Stadtamhof is an outstanding example of a central-European medieval trading town, which has well preserved its historical stages of development, and which is an exceptional illustration to the development of commerce particularly from the 11th to 14th centuries.

Integrity

Regensburg's Old Town has been able to reserve its original medieval outline since the 14th century. The Old Town survived the Second World War in exceptionally good shape. As a result, but also due to restoration efforts starting in the 1970s, a large number of old buildings have been preserved well, which contributes to the historical integrity of the town and the effective protection of important views of the property. The property therefore contains all elements necessary to express the Outstanding Universal Value. There are no adverse impacts of development and/or neglect.

Authenticity

Taking into account that the city was built in stone, rather than timber, the individual listed buildings have maintained their authenticity. The restoration of the buildings is carefully monitored and correctly carried out, according to the legal provisions in place as well as respecting the historic fabric.

Management and protection requirements

The Old Town of Regensburg and its buffer zone have been legally protected since 1975 in accordance with the Bavarian Law for the Preservation of Historic Buildings. The inscribed property is also ruled by the 1982Statutes concerning Local Building Ordinances for the Protection of the Old Town of Regensburg ("Old Town of Regensburg Statutes"). The Federal Building Code (1986/1997) constitutes the legal basis for construction and development planning. Complemented by local by-laws and the management plan, this complex system of protection ensures the good state of conservation of the property.

Several institutions on communal and state level share the responsibility for protecting the property. The City of Regensburg is responsible for its management. The Steering Committee carries out integrative monitoring as a basis of a thorough planning process and sustainable development in the historic town, with due care being taken to ensure that its values are respected. Strategies aim at restoring the historic urban fabric as well as strengthening the vitality of the inhabited historic town.

Links
Deutsche UNESCO-Kommission

Facebook page

Instagram page

Google Arts & Culture: Story

Stadt Regensburg website (in English only)

Activities 1
World Heritage Cities Programme
News  4
International Day for Monuments and Sites 2021 - Complex Pasts: Diverse Futures
16 April 2021
Videos: Site managers report on Covid-19
26 October 2020
Inscription of Old Town of Regensburg with Stadtamhof on UNESCO’s World Heritage List
26 November 2007
Ancient irrigation system (Oman) and Palaces of Genoa (Italy) among ten new sites on World Heritage List
13 July 2006
Events  2
Regional Conference of the OWHC Region of North Western Europe
12 Sep 2012 - 14 Sep 2012
OWHC Northwest European Regional Conference “Earth, Wind, Water, Fire – Environmental Challenges to Urban World Heritage”
16 Sep 2008 - 18 Sep 2008
Media
play_arrow Old town of Regensburg with Stadtamhof (UNESCO/NHK)
Germany
Date of Inscription: 2006
Criteria: (ii)(iii)(iv)
Property : 182.8 ha

Buffer zone: 775.6 ha
Dossier: 1155
Bavaria
N49 1 14 E12 5 57
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2009 2007
Protections
by other conservation instruments

1 protection / 1 element

2003 Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage (1 element)

Craft techniques and customary practices of cathedral workshops, or Bauhütten, in Europe, know-how, transmission, development of knowledge and innovation

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026