World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Wulingyuan Scenic and Historic Interest Area
Wulingyuan Scenic and Historic Interest Area
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Assistance
Wulingyuan Scenic and Historic Interest Area

A spectacular area stretching over more than 26,000 ha in China's Hunan Province, the site is dominated by more than 3,000 narrow sandstone pillars and peaks, many over 200 m high. Between the peaks lie ravines and gorges with streams, pools and waterfalls, some 40 caves, and two large natural bridges. In addition to the striking beauty of the landscape, the region is also noted for the fact that it is home to a number of endangered plant and animal species.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Wulingyuan is an island of nature within a heavily populated agricultural region. A spectacular area stretching some 26,400ha in China’s Hunan Province, the site is dominated by more than 3,000 narrow quartz sandstone pillars, many over 200m high. Nestled within its towering peaks lie ravines and gorges with streams, pools and waterfalls, two large natural bridges, and some 40 caves. Impressive calcite deposits are a notable feature within these caves. In addition to the striking beauty of the landscape, including spectacular jagged stone peaks, luxuriant vegetation cover and clear lakes and streams, the region is also home to a number of endangered plant and animal species.

Criterion (vii): The huge number of sandstone columns and peaks—more than 3,000—are spectacular. These, coupled with other land forms (natural bridges, ravines, waterfalls, streams, pools and caves) and dense broadleaf forest, present an aesthetically beautiful landscape enhanced by the mists and clouds which frequently shroud the site. There are more than 40 caves and two huge natural stone bridges, one of which rises 357 m above the valley floor.

At time of evaluation it was also noted that with additional information there could also be justification for inscribing this property under criterion (x), as the site provides important habitat for a number of threatened plant and animal species such as dhole, Asiatic black bear and Chinese water deer.

Integrity

The property has within its boundaries all the necessary elements demonstrating the natural beauty for which it was inscribed, as well as a buffer zone. Integrity issues noted at time of inscription include human pressure from use of the reserve by people living in and around it, and the intense pressure from visitors. Numerous tourist facilities also have an aesthetic impact on the natural values of the property. However many measures have been and are still being undertaken to address these issues.

Protection and management requirements

Wulingyuan was approved and listed as a national key scenic area by the Chinese State Council in 1988, thus has a long history of protection under relevant national and provincial laws and regulations. In 1999, owing to the growing commercialization and loss of natural values, the local authorities declared the Decision of Protecting Wulingyuan World Natural Heritage Property, and began the demolition of houses in the scenic areas. The scenic area was expanded, settlement was reduced and ecological tourism was promoted. By the end of 2002, the adverse impacts on the aesthetic values of Wulingyuan scenic areas had been mitigated. In January 2001, the Hunan Provincial People’s Congress Standing Committee implemented the Regulations on Protection of Wulingyuan World Natural Heritage Property, providing a stronger legal basis for protection. The property is managed by the Administrative Bureau of Wulingyuan Scenic and Historic Interest Area assisted by several other resource management agencies. The Office of Heritage Protection was established in 2000 as the operational agency for managing the property and subsequently the Zhangjiajie, Tianzishan, Suoxiyu and Yangjiajie Scenic Area Offices and Protection Stations were established. In total, there are approximately 500 management staff. Museums and visitor centres have been created for research, education and interpretation of the property’s natural values

In 2005, the Comprehensive Plan of Wulingyuan Scenic and Historic Interest Area was revised and Wulingyuan World Natural Heritage protection regulations were established to ensure the long-term protection and conservation of the property. The quartz sandstone peaks, columns, karst landscapes, gorges, species, vegetation, ecology, and all other elements that contribute to be aesthetic value of Wulingyuan need to be strictly maintained and monitored. The number, seasonal distribution and activities of visitors is scientifically controlled and adjusted so that a dynamic balance between World Heritage, people and the economy is established. In order to deal with the challenges of tourism development and environment protection, special organizations have been established which monitor all the elements contributing to the aesthetic value of the property cited above as well as the numbers of visitors and their impact, air quality, water quality, environmental quality, electronic radiation, and noise in order to fulfil both the requirements of international conventions and national laws and regulations.
Links
Official website page

Protectedplanet.net

Media
play_arrow NHK World Heritage 100 Series
play_arrow Wulingyuan Scenic and Historic Interest Area (UNESCO/NHK)
China
Date of Inscription: 1992
Criteria: (vii)
Property : 26,400 ha

Buffer zone: 12,680 ha
Dossier: 640
N29 19 59.988 E110 30 0
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2021 2019 2015 1998
Protections
by other conservation instruments

1 protection / 1 element

Geoparks (1 element)

Zhangjiajie UNESCO Global Geopark

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026