World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Mining Area of the Great Copper Mountain in ...
Mining Area of the Great Copper Mountain in Falun
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Mining Area of the Great Copper Mountain in Falun

The enormous mining excavation known as the Great Pit at Falun is the most striking feature of a landscape that illustrates the activity of copper production in this region since at least the 13th century. The 17th-century planned town of Falun with its many fine historic buildings, together with the industrial and domestic remains of a number of settlements spread over a wide area of the Dalarna region, provide a vivid picture of what was for centuries one of the world's most important mining areas.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief Synthesis

The Mining Area of the Great Copper Mountain in Falun is one of the most outstanding industrial monuments in the world. The cultural landscape graphically illustrates the activities of copper production in the Dalarna region of central Sweden since at least the 9th century. Over many centuries, until production ceased in the late 20th century, the region was one of the most significant areas of mining and metals production. This culminated in the 17th century in the dominance of Sweden as the major producer of copper and exerting a strong influence on the technological, economic, social, and political development of Sweden and Europe.

The history of the mining industry can be seen in the abundant industrial and domestic remains characteristic of this industry that still survive in the natural landscape around Falun, which has been moulded and transformed by human ingenuity and resourcefulness. The enormous mining excavation known as the Great Pit (Stora Stöten) at Falun is the most striking feature of this landscape. Associated with the enormous open-cast mine and its galleries, shafts and visitors’ mine are hoisting gear, head frames, wheelhouses, winch houses, pivot and administrative buildings, housing for workers and ancillary facilities.

The Mining Area of the Great Copper Mountain in Falun is noteworthy not only for its technological heritage but also for the abundant evidence illustrating the economic and social evolution of the copper industry and the social structure of the mining community over time. Many small mining settlements and miners dwellings, as well as the 17th-century planned town of Falun graphically illustrate the special socio-economic framework of much of European mining up to late 19th century. The fine historic buildings of Falun and the industrial and domestic remains of a number of settlements spread over a wide area of the property provide a vivid picture of life in one of the world’s most important mining areas.

Criterion (ii): Copper mining at Falun was influenced by German technology, but this was to become the major producer of copper in the 17th century and exercised a profound influence on mining technology in all parts of the world for two centuries.

Criterion (iii): The entire Falun landscape is dominated by the remains of copper mining and production, which began as early as the 9th century and came to an end in the closing years of the 20th century.

Criterion (v): The successive stages in economic and social evolution of the copper industry in the Falun region, from a form of “cottage industry” to full industrial production, can be seen in the abundant industrial, urban, and domestic remains characteristic of this industry that still survive.

Integrity

The integrity of both the Great Pit and its associated buildings and the urban fabric of the old part of Falun have been maintained by the application of statutory regulations, reinforced by a strong resolution on the part of the residents to ensure the survival of the evidence of Falun’s great industrial heritage. All of the buildings, structures and associated equipment within the World Heritage property are well preserved.

Authenticity

The authenticity of individual buildings and monuments within the inscribed property is high. They have been well preserved and show the old traditions of mining construction. This is the result of stringent conditions laid down by the relevant legislation regarding maintenance and materials selected for restoration and implemented by the national, county and municipal agencies involved.

Mining activities and metal productions have left innumerable traces in both the landscape and the settlement. Collectively these attributes create the cultural landscape of the Mining Area of the Great Copper Mountain in Falun and underpin the authenticity of the property. Metals are in great demand on the world market prompting interest in ore prospecting in the area surrounding the Great Pit in Falun. Given the potential impact from future prospecting or mining on the attributes of the property and the authenticity of the cultural landscape, this will warrant careful evaluation before any decision is made on allowing these activities while also taking into account the International Council of Mining and Metals (ICMM) Position Statement not to explore or mine in World Heritage properties.

Protection and management requirements

The monuments, sites and landscape that make up the World Heritage property are all protected under the comprehensive and interlocking Swedish legislation for cultural and environmental protection.

All archaeological monuments and sites, listed historic buildings and ecclesiastical buildings of the Church of Sweden, are given full legal protection by the Historic Environment Act (1988:950). Any interventions must receive authorization from the County Administration.

The Environmental Code (1998:808) lays down general rules relating to the protection and conservation of the environment. There are two provisions relating to cultural values. First, it specifies fundamental requirements for the use of land and water areas, design to maintain their cultural values. These are applicable to public authorities as well as private individuals or enterprises. Secondly, it introduces the concept of cultural reserve. The Code is regulated by the County Administration.

The Foundation Stora Kopparberget owns the Falun mine. The miner-yeomen’s homesteads and town buildings are for the most part privately owned. The Municipality of Falun, the Church and the National Property Board own a number of official buildings. The authority of the Municipality of Falun, the County Administrative Board and the Swedish National Heritage Board supervises them.

The Management of the World Heritage property is coordinated through a comprehensive Management Plan. In addition, a World Heritage Council consisting of representatives of Falun Municipality, the Stora Kopparberget Foundation, the Dalarna Museum and the County Administration Board has been established. The Council manages the preservation and strengthening of the historical values within the World Heritage property.

Links
Visit Dalarna

World Heritage Journeys web site

www.falun.se

www.lansstyrelsen.se

www.visitsodradalarna.se

www.falugruva.se

www.dalarnasmuseum.se

www.varldsarvetfalun.se

News  2
UNESCO launches new travel platform ‘World Heritage Journeys’ to promote sustainable tourism in the EU
13 September 2018
World Heritage Committee Inscribes 31 New Sites on the World Heritage List
13 December 2001
Media
play_arrow Mining Area of the Great Copper Mountain in Falun (UNESCO/NHK)
Sweden
Date of Inscription: 2001
Criteria: (ii)(iii)(v)
Property : 42.82 ha

Buffer zone: 3,499.96 ha
Dossier: 1027
Town of Falun, Dalarna Province
N60 36 16.992 E15 37 50.988
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026