World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Mountain Resort and its Outlying Temples, ...
Mountain Resort and its Outlying Temples, Chengde
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Assistance
Mountain Resort and its Outlying Temples, Chengde

The Mountain Resort (the Qing dynasty's summer palace), in Hebei Province, was built between 1703 and 1792. It is a vast complex of palaces and administrative and ceremonial buildings. Temples of various architectural styles and imperial gardens blend harmoniously into a landscape of lakes, pastureland and forests. In addition to its aesthetic interest, the Mountain Resort is a rare historic vestige of the final development of feudal society in China.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The Mountain Resort of palaces and gardens at Chengde with its Outlying Temples is the largest existing imperial palace-garden and temple complex in China, covering a total area of 611.2ha. Built between 1703 and 1792 as the Qing emperors’ detached summer palace near the imperial Mulan hunting ground 350 kilometres from Beijing, it was a base from which to strengthen administration in the border regions. The 12 outlying imperial temples, some built in the architectural styles of the ethnic minorities, are distributed across the eastern and northern hills outside the palace and garden area. They fostered relations with the ethnic minorities and helped to safeguard the Mountain Resort. Every summer and autumn, emperors of the Qing dynasty including Kangxi and Qianlong handled military and government affairs of the country and received leaders of ethnic minority groups and diplomatic envoys from foreign countries here, and went north from here to hold the Mulan Autumn Hunting. Important historical events of the Qing dynasty took place here, and the historical sites and objects have witnessed the consolidation and development of China as a unitary multi-ethnic state.

The Mountain Resort and its Outlying Temples, Chengde is a classic masterpiece of Chinese palace architecture, gardening art and religious architecture.The landscape of the Mountain Resort is designed following the topography of natural hills and water. As an outstanding example of Chinese natural landscape gardens and palaces, it inherits and carries forward China’s imperial gardening tradition. By integrating elements of Han, Mongolian and Tibetan architectural art and culture the Outlying Temples crystallize the achievements of cultural exchanges and integration among different ethnic groups in the course of development of Chinese architecture.

The manmade landscape of the Mountain Resort and its Outlying Temples perfectly integrates with the special natural environment of Chengde, such as the danxia landform. Its natural and harmonious layout is a successful practice of the traditional Chinese geomantic culture (fengshui). As a representative of ancient Chinese garden design, it once exerted influence in Europe, and has played an important role in the history of 18th century landscape garden design worldwide.

Criterion (ii): The landscape of the Mountain Resort and its Outlying Temples is an outstanding example of Chinese integration of buildings into the natural environment, which had and continues to have a profound influence on landscape design.

Criterion (iv): The Mountain Resort and its Outlying Temples represent in material form the final flowering of feudal society in China.

Integrity

The Mountain Resort and its Outlying Temples have a high degree of integrity. Within the 611.2 ha. area covered by the property, the historic layout and natural system of hills and water since the 18th century are basically integrally preserved, with all main historical relics, information and corresponding important values preserved intact, demonstrating China’s multi-ethnic cultures, including Han, Manchu, Mongolian and Tibetan, and the integration of Confucianism, Buddhism, Taoism and other religions.

Authenticity

The layout of the 18th century, with all the attributes, including buildings, sites, stone sculptures, wall paintings and Buddhist statues are fundamentally preserved. It authentically presents the classic artistic achievement of gardening and temple architecture of China in the 18th century, and genuinely preserves the historic and physical testimony of the unity, consolidation and development of China as a multi-ethnic country. Therefore it enjoys a high level of authenticity.

Protection and management requirements

At the national level, the Mountain Resort and its Outlying Temples at Chengde is a State Priority Protected Site, owned by the state and protected by the Law of the People’s Republic of China on the Protection of Cultural Relics, with the boundary of the property area and buffer zone delimited and proclaimed. The People’s Standing Committee of Hebei Province has promulgated the Regulations on the Protection of Chengde Mountain Resort and its Outlying Temples and the Hebei provincial government has approved the Conservation Plan for the Historically and Culturally Famous City of Chengde.

The Conservation Master Plan of Chengde Mountain Resort and its Outlying Temples has been formulated and submitted for approval following pertinent procedures, with conservation, management and monitoring on the property and its settings strengthened. This provides an overall framework and direction for the protection and management of the property. With clear responsibility, fairly adequate staff and a comprehensive management regime, the conservation and management institution for the property provides a firm legal, systematic and management framework for the protection of the integrity and authenticity of the property. A strong professional team has been established to ensure the protection, maintenance, research and security of the property. The governments at all levels have attached great importance to the protection of the property, with increasing funds allocated to site conservation. Relevant regulations and plans are strictly followed, which safeguards the integrity and authenticity of the Mountain Resort and its Outlying Temples, Chengde. The property is in good condition at present.

Links
Chengde Municipal Cultural Heritage Bureau (in Chinese only)

China
Date of Inscription: 1994
Criteria: (ii)(iv)
Property : 611.2 ha

Dossier: 703
Chengde City, Hebei Province
N40 59 12.984 E117 56 17.988
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

1998 1996
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026