World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Mozu-Furuichi Kofun Group: Mounded Tombs of ...
Mozu-Furuichi Kofun Group: Mounded Tombs of Ancient Japan
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Mozu-Furuichi Kofun Group: Mounded Tombs of Ancient Japan

Located on a plateau above the Osaka Plain, this property includes 49 kofun (“old mounds” in Japanese). These tombs were for members of the elite. These kofun have been selected from among a total of 160,000 in Japan and form the richest material representation of the Kofun period, from the 3rd to the 6th century CE. They demonstrate the differences in social classes of that period and show evidence of a highly sophisticated funerary system. Burial mounds of significant variations in size, kofun take the geometrically elaborate design forms of keyhole, scallop, square or circle. They were decorated with paving stones and clay figures. The kofun demonstrate exceptional technical achievements of earthen constructions.  

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Located on a plateau above the Osaka Plain, the Mozu-Furuichi Kofun Group is a serial property of 45 components which contains 49 kofun (‘old mound’), a large and distinctive type of burial mound. The selected kofun are found in two major clusters, and are the richest tangible representation of the culture of the Kofun period in Japan from the 3rd to 6th centuries, a period before Japanese society became an established centralised state under the influence of the Chinese system of law. The kofun have a range of contents, such as grave goods (weapons, armour, ornaments); and clay figures used to decorated the mounds, known as haniwa (in the form of cylinders arranged in rows, or representations of objects, houses, animals and people). Understood as tombs for kings’ clans and affiliates during this period, some of the kofun are Ryobo (imperial mausolea) and are managed by Japan’s Imperial Household Agency. The serial components have been selected from a total of 160,000 kofun from around Japan and represent the ‘middle kofun’ period (late 4th to late 5th centuries) which is considered to be the peak of the Kofun period. The attributes of the property are the 49 burial mounds, their geometric forms, methods and materials of construction, moats, archaeological materials and contents (including grave goods, burial facilities and the haniwa). The settings of the kofun, their visual presence in the Osaka region, and the remaining physical and visual links between the kofun are important attributes; as is the evidence of the distinctive funerary practices and ritual uses.

Criterion (iii): While 160,000 kofun are found throughout Japan, the Mozu-Furuichi Kofun Group represents and provides exceptional testimony to the culture of the Kofun period of Japan’s ancient history. The 45 components demonstrate the period’s socio-political structures, social class differences and highly sophisticated funerary system.

Criterion (iv): The Mozu-Furuichi Kofun Group demonstrates an outstanding type of ancient East Asian burial mound construction. The role of the kofun in the establishment of social hierarchies within this particular and significant historical period, as well as the tangible attributes such as the clay sculptures, moats and geometric terraced mounds reinforced by stone, are outstanding.

Integrity

The Mozu and Furuichi groups of kofun provide a cohesive narrative of the kingly power expressed through the clustering of the 49 kofun, the range of types and sizes, the grave goods and haniwa, and the continuing ritual uses and high esteem that these sites hold within Japanese society. The integrity of the serial property is based on the rationale for the selection of the components and their ability to convey the Outstanding Universal Value of the kofun. The intactness of the individual components, the material evidence of the mounds and their context, and the state of conservation are also determinants of integrity. Issues that impact on the integrity of the serial property include loss of some features (such as moats), and changes to the uses and settings of the components due to the close proximity of urban development.

Authenticity

Despite changed uses and landscape treatments, and the high degree of 20th century urbanisation of the Osaka region, the kofun are a significant visible and historical presence within the present-day landscape. The authenticity of the selected kofun is demonstrated by their forms, materials and extensive archaeological contents, as well as the esteem which they engender in Japanese society. While the Ryobo generally demonstrate a high degree of authenticity, there are variations within the series. There is a need to ensure that seibi works are subject to impact assessment and reviewed in order to sustain the authenticity of the kofun.

Management and protection requirements

Legal protection of the components is provided by national and local government laws. Ryobo components are protected by the Imperial House Law and the National Property Act; and the ‘Historic Site’ components are protected by the Law for the Protection of Cultural Properties. Some components have both designations. The Municipal Historic Sites are designated on the basis of the City Ordinance for the Protection of Cultural Properties, established in accordance with the Law for the Protection of Cultural Properties. Expansion of the buffer zone for component 44 is in progress. Buffer zone protection includes regulations that control the height and design of new buildings, as well as outdoor advertisements, based on a number of local laws.

The management system is based on the establishment of the Mozu-Furuichi Kofun Group World Heritage Council (comprised of representatives of the Imperial Household Agency, and the relevant Prefectural and City Governments, with the Agency for Cultural Affairs as an Observer). The Council is advised by the Mozu-Furuichi Kofun Group World Heritage Scientific Committee. The Comprehensive Management Plan outlines the implementation of the protection and management of the property and the buffer zones. The Mozu-Furuichi Kofun Group World Heritage Council has overall responsibility for implementing the Action Plan and ensuring coordination between different organisations. The Osaka Prefecture and each of the relevant City governments has a Disaster Prevention Plan; and there are museums and interpretation facilities in the cities in Osaka Prefecture: Sakai, Habikino and Fujiidera. The Sakai City Government is planning a new interpretation facility in the Mozu area, which should be subject to Heritage Impact Assessment.

Factors affecting this property are those associated with the close proximity of urban development, creating significant potential pressures on the buffer zones. Pressures on the conservation of the kofun occur through the erosion of the earthen mounds, poorly managed vegetation growth, and the need to maintain water quality of the moats. These are actively managed. The conservation measures are appropriate and well-resourced, although actions by the various governments, private owners and communities must continue to be well-coordinated. The monitoring arrangements are adequate, although they could be further enhanced through further development of non-invasive techniques for periodically monitoring the structural condition of the mounds, and indicators for monitoring the interests and support of local residential communities.
Links
Towards World Cultural Heritage Inscription of Mozu-Furuichi Kofungun, Ancient Tumulus Clusters

News  1
Seven cultural sites inscribed on UNESCO’s World Heritage List
6 July 2019
Japan
Date of Inscription: 2019
Minor boundary modification inscribed year: 2023
Criteria: (iii)(iv)
Property : 166.66 ha

Buffer zone: 891 ha
Dossier: 1593bis
Serial: yes

Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026