World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Historic Centre of the Town of Goiás
Historic Centre of the Town of Goiás
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Assistance
Historic Centre of the Town of Goiás

Goiás testifies to the occupation and colonization of the lands of central Brazil in the 18th and 19th centuries. The urban layout is an example of the organic development of a mining town, adapted to the conditions of the site. Although modest, both public and private architecture form a harmonious whole, thanks to the coherent use of local materials and vernacular techniques.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis 

The Historic Centre of the Town of Goiás is built between two series of hills, along a small river, the Rio Vermelho. The areas on the right bank are tight up against the north-western hills, and have a popular character, indicated by the church of Rosario, which was traditionally reserved for slaves. The areas on the left bank, limited by the hills to the south-east, are reserved for the more representative groups of buildings, including the parish church (today the cathedral) of Santana, the Governor’s Palace, the barracks, the Casa de Fundição (foundry), extending to the Praça do Chafariz and climbing towards the hill of Chapeu do Padre. Here are also to be found the historic residential quarter and a characteristic market place.The urban layout is an example of the organic development of a mining town, adapted to the conditions of the site. Although modest, both public and private architecture form a harmonious whole, due to the coherent use of local materials and vernacular techniques.

Goiás testifies to the occupation and colonization of the lands of central Brazil in the 18th and 19th centuries. The origins of the town of Goiás are closely related with the history of the more or less official expeditions (bandeiras), which left from São Paulo to explore the interior of the Brazilian territory. It was the first officially recognized urban core, the first borough to be planned West of the demarcation line of the Treaty of Tordesillas that defined the boundaries of the Portuguese possessions.

Criterion (ii): In its layout and architecture the Historic Center of the Town of Goiás is an outstanding example of a European town admirably adapted to the climatic, geographical and cultural constraints of central South America. This is demonstrated by the urban plan adapted to the topography either side of the river, the architectural features and layouts, materials and building techniques. 

Criterion (iv): The Historic Center of the Town of Goiás represents the evolution of a form of urban structure and architecture characteristic of the colonial settlement of South America, making full use of local materials and techniques and conserving its exceptional setting. It is the last remaining example of the occupation of the interior of Brazil, as it was practiced in the 18th and 19th centuries. The Historic Center of the Town of Goiás is characterized by the harmony of its architecture, due to the proportions and types of buildings.

Integrity

The Historic Center of the Town of Goiás went through a long period of stagnation from the 19th century until recent times. Its townscape has therefore not been subject to any major changes in modern times. Otherwise, it is a good example of the appearance of the mining town of the 18th and 19th centuries, including its natural environment, which has remained intact. The few constructions that have taken place since the 19th century have been made using for the most part traditional techniques and building materials, or their size and architectural expression do not jeopardize the integrity of the place.

Authenticity

The Historic Center of the Town of Goiás and its hinterland bear a rich cultural tradition that includes not only architecture and construction techniques but also music, poetry, gastronomy, and popular events. Many of these traditions continue and form a substantial part of the cultural identity of Goiás. The historic centre has an important meaning for the local community, not only on account of its urban and architectural values but also for its rich social and cultural life. The relatively modest development of tourism reinforces the genuineness and authenticity of these cultural manifestations. For that reason, the Historic Center of the Town of Goiás is considered to have well preserved its historical authenticity.

Protection and management requirements 

The applicable legislation governing the protection of the Historic Center heritage site is set out in the Brazilian Federal Constitution (1988), in particular articles 20, 23-24, 30, 182, 215-216, and 225. In 1978, the Historic Center of the Town of Goiás was designated a federal heritage site by the National Institute of Historical and Artistic Heritage (Instituto do Patrimônio Histórico e Artístico Nacional – IPHAN), although individual structures had been protected since the 1950s. At the federal level, protected heritage properties are governed by Decree-Law 259 (1937) and IPHAN Directive 001 (1993). In response to the recommendations of the International Council on Monuments and Sites – ICOMOS, the protected perimeter was expanded in 2003 to include an additional 300 properties and 6 urban farmsteads which surround the city to form a “green belt” of protection. In 2010, IPHAN issued Directive 187, which sets forth the procedures for investigating and ascertaining administrative violations arising from conduct and activities that cause damage to the architectural heritage. In addition, the Historic Center of the Town of Goiás is protected at the state and municipal levels through State Law 8915 (1980) and Municipal Law 206 (1996), respectively. Review of the city’s Master Plan is still pending. 

IPHAN’s Goiás Technical Office has primary responsibility for day-to-day enforcement of the heritage site, a task accomplished primarily through ongoing monitoring and surveillance of the site. Staff of the agency’s Goiás State Superintendence conduct regular visits to the city, providing the local Technical Office with the necessary support. 

In regard to the flooding that affected the Historic Center of the Town of Goiás less than a month after its designation as a World Heritage Site, specific guidance from ICOMOS provided invaluable support to the effort to address specific cases of cultural properties found in degraded and poor condition, spurring the execution of emergency repair work and subsequent rehabilitation of structures damaged by the disaster. Surviving knowledge and continuing use of traditional construction techniques by local builders has been central to maintaining the integrity of the site. All measures to date have been conducted in exemplary fashion by the working group established under IPHAN and the related goals and objectives fully achieved. 

Significant urban restoration and rehabilitation efforts have been implemented with budget resources from IPHAN and the Monumenta Program. Indeed, the financial resources extended through the Program to privately owned properties have played a particularly significant role in enhancing the city’s urban framework. Moreover, IPHAN has provided a crucial contribution by training qualified personnel in restoration and refurbishment work, while indirectly contributing to job creation in the city through the contracting of public projects. Educational initiatives have also been sponsored with a view to transforming the local population into a primary guardian of local cultural heritage, guided by the recognition that this objective is inextricably bound to the local community’s knowledge and understanding of that heritage.  In late 2009, the federal government launched the Growth Acceleration Program for Historical Cities (Programa de Aceleração do Crescimento para as Cidades Históricas – PAC-CH), which encompasses the city of Goiás. The program serves as an important management tool, through which guidelines, measures, and goals aimed at fostering integrated action within the pertinent government agencies in coordination with organized civil society are set forth based on a clearly defined strategic plan. In particular, the measures seek to endow historical cities with the means to adapt themselves to the needs of contemporary life while preserving their cultural heritage. 

Current challenges include promoting enhanced coordination between government agencies and civil society organizations to address the cultural issues associated with the environmental context in which the city is embedded.

Links
Google Arts & Culture: Story

Activities 3
World Heritage Earthen Architecture Programme (WHEAP)
World Heritage Cities Programme
World Heritage Youth Forum (2010), Brasilia, Brazil
News  2
International Day for Monuments and Sites 2021 - Complex Pasts: Diverse Futures
16 April 2021
World Heritage Committee Inscribes 31 New Sites on the World Heritage List
13 December 2001
Media
play_arrow Historic Centre of the Town of Goiás (UNESCO/NHK)
play_arrow Historic Centre of the Town of Goiás (UNESCO/NHK)
Brazil
Date of Inscription: 2001
Criteria: (ii)(iv)
Property : 40.3 ha

Buffer zone: 43.5 ha
Dossier: 993
State of Goiás
S15 56 3.232 W50 8 24.59
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2004 2003 2002
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026