World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Huanglong Scenic and Historic Interest Area
Huanglong Scenic and Historic Interest Area
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Huanglong Scenic and Historic Interest Area

Situated in the north-west of Sichuan Province, the Huanglong valley is made up of snow-capped peaks and the easternmost of all the Chinese glaciers. In addition to its mountain landscape, diverse forest ecosystems can be found, as well as spectacular limestone formations, waterfalls and hot springs. The area also has a population of endangered animals, including the giant panda and the Sichuan golden snub-nosed monkey.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis 

Situated in the north-west of Sichuan Province, the Huanglong valley with its series of travertine lakes, waterfalls, forests and mountain scenery is a superlative natural property. Topped by permanently snow-capped peaks rising from a base of 1,700 m up to 5,588 m, these include the easternmost glacier in China. Covering 60,000 ha, this area located within the Minshan Mountains also includes spectacular limestone formations and hot springs. Its diverse forest ecosystems provide the home for a number of endangered plants and animals, including the giant panda and Sichuan golden snub-nosed monkey.

Criterion (vii): Huanglong is renowned for its beautiful mountainous scenery, with relatively undisturbed and highly diverse forest ecosystems, combined with the more spectacular localised karst formations, such as travertine pools, waterfalls and limestone shoals. Its travertine terraces and lakes are certainly unique in all of Asia, and rate among the three most outstanding examples in the world.

Integrity

The Huanglong valley is relatively compact and surrounded on three sides by precipitous peaks. An entrance station at the mouth of the valley controls access. Outside the buffer zone there is seasonal stock grazing by nomadic Tibetan pastoralists but impacts are limited.

The property contains all the necessary elements to demonstrate its aesthetic importance including, in particular, travertine formations, waterfalls and limestone formations. Tourist impacts are controlled through strict management through a zoning system, ensuring that forest ecosystems and mountain scenery are well protected. Wildlife is in a healthy state with numbers increasing, and the vegetation is recovering well.

Protection and management requirements

As a national park, Huanglong is protected by national and local laws and regulations. These laws and regulations include the Environment Protection Law, Law of China on the Protection of Wildlife, Regulation on National Park in China, Sichuan Provincial Regulation on World Heritage Protection, promulgatedin 2004, and Regulation on Implementing Sichuan Provincial Regulation on World Heritage Protection promulgated by Aba Autonomous Prefecture. These ensure the long-term management and conservation of the property.

In 2006, the administrative structure of Huanglong World Heritage Property was established, comprised of more than 20 departments including Nature Protection, Scientific Research, Planning and others. A substantial budget is provided to ensure the protection of the property. From 2004 to 2007, the Sichuan Provincial Government organized the Survey on Water Circulation System of Huanglong-Jiuzhaigou World Heritage Site and the Survey on Fragile Ecosystems in Scenic Areas. These provide a comprehensive database for protection and management operations.

The main management issue is the growing number of tourists. Other potential issues requiring effective action include natural forest fire and pollution. The property benefits from the Master Plan of Huanglong, together with a Scenic Planning Standard, for better protection, demonstration, utilization and management of the property. This Plan promotes, through strict observance of the law and effective science-based management, its environmental, social and economic sustainable development.

Links
Official website page (in Chinese only)

Protectedplanet.net

News  1
World Heritage sites participate in Earth Hour
28 March 2012
Media
play_arrow Huanglong Scenic and Historic Interest Area (UNESCO/NHK)
play_arrow NHK World Heritage 100 Series
China
Date of Inscription: 1992
Criteria: (vii)
Property : 60,000 ha

Dossier: 638
Songpan County, Sichuan Province
N32 45 15.012 E103 49 19.992
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

1998
Protections
by other conservation instruments

1 protection / 1 element

Biosphere Reserves (1 element)

Huanglong

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026