World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Wixárika Route through Sacred Sites to ...
Wixárika Route through Sacred Sites to Wirikuta (Tatehuarí Huajuyé)
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Wixárika Route through Sacred Sites to Wirikuta (Tatehuarí Huajuyé)
The Wixárika Route is a serial property of 20 sites, spanning over 500 km across five states in north-central Mexico. This “braid of trails” connects sacred landscapes central to the spiritual and cultural practices of the Wixárika Indigenous Peoples. Beginning in the Huichol Sierra, the route leads to Wirikuta in the Chihuahuan Desert, with additional sacred sites in Nayarit, Jalisco, Zacatecas, San Luis Potosi and Durango. Traversing diverse ecological regions, the route supports rituals tied to ancestral deities, agriculture, and community well-being. Known as “Tatehuarí Huajuyé” or the Path of Our Grandfather Fire, it embodies deep spiritual and environmental significance.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The Wixárika Route through Sacred Sites to Wirikuta (Tatehuarí Huajuyé) is a serial property of twenty component parts that span an area across north-central Mexico of more than 500 kilometres, traversing a number of ecological regions, some of which are important for their biodiversity and other natural values. The rituals along the route are practiced in order to maintain relations with the natural elements considered as ancestral deities, to ensure the success of the milpa agricultural cycle, and to support the general welfare of the people. Together, the component parts comprise the sacred route to Wirikuta - the Path of Our Grandfather Fire - “Tatehuarí Huajuyé”.

The intimate relation of the Wixárika with their territory is expressed throughout the sacred sites and landscapes that occur within the twenty component parts. These express bonds with the worldview of the Wixárika culture, especially with features such as maize, the Golden Eagle, deer, and peyote. The annual pilgrimage involves a sequence of traditional ritual activities that comprise the ceremonial cycles. The property is an exceptional and representative continuing example of the ancestral ceremonial and trade routes that have connected and culturally enriched the peoples of the American continent for millennia.

The attributes of the route include the intangible heritage traditions and practices of the Wixárika, including the veneration of living ancestors in nature, their rich oral tradition passed on through stories, songs, prayers and sacred tales, the ceremonial centres and temples, as well as the crafting of traditional objects. The route is also associated with the milpa traditional agricultural and land-use system.

Criterion (iii): The Wixárika Route through Sacred Sites to Wirikuta (Tatehuarí Huajuyé) is one of the most representative pre-Columbian routes still in use in the Americas and is an exceptional testimony of the continuing cultural traditions of the Wixárika people.  The annual pilgrimages of the Wixárika to Wirikuta and other sacred sites are a clear manifestation of a spiritual tradition, reflecting a specific worldview that connects humans with nature and the sacred realm. The route bears witness to the intimate cultural knowledge that the Wixárika have of these lands, plants and animals.

Criterion (vi): The Wixárika Route through Sacred Sites to Wirikuta (Tatehuarí Huajuyé) is an outstanding illustration of the inter-relationship between culture and the natural environment in the spiritual practices of the Wixárika. The sacred sites are imbued with a deep spiritual meaning, representing different elements of the Wixárika worldviews and beliefs. Specific landforms, weather, plants and animals reveal the ancestors, and each component part has specific ritual meaning. Flora and fauna with ritual meaning include tobacco, peyote, deer, and the Golden Eagle. During the travels through this route, elders transmit their knowledge to younger generations through oral traditions, dance, stories, art, music and rituals.

Integrity

This serial property of twenty sites includes the principal sacred sites and landscapes of the Tatehuarí Huajuyé that were selected in close collaboration with Wixárika authorities, and encompasses the necessary attributes that reflect its cultural meaning and historical development. The component parts reflect the sequence of ritual activities performed and stories told by the shamans (maraacames) during the annual pilgrimage and ceremonies.

The annual pilgrimage is a central and continuing element of the Wixárika worldview and culture, reaffirming the spiritual bond between the Wixárika people and its sacred territories. The state of conservation of the component parts is generally good, although they are potentially vulnerable due to a range of factors such as extractive mining, instances of restricted access through private property, urban expansion and inappropriate tourism and peyote consumption.

Authenticity

The authenticity of the property is based on the safeguarding of the spiritual practices, the conservation of the natural landscape (including ecosystems, water quality, species and landforms), and the transmission of cultural traditions within Wixárika communities. The landscapes, ritual practices, vernacular architecture, and artistic expressions reflect the continuity of the Wixárika traditions. The serial property meets the conditions of authenticity based on the safeguarding of both its tangible (form, materials, location) and intangible (language, traditions, spirituality) characteristics. The cultural value of the property is truthfully expressed through the attributes present in its component parts.

Protection and management requirements

The legal protection of the property is provided by a number of state and federal government laws. The National Institute of Anthropology and History (INAH) is the federal agency responsible for the conservation of cultural heritage, and the National Commission for Protected Natural Areas (CONANP) has responsibilities for Nature Conservation Areas. The General Law of Ecological Balance and Environmental Protection (LGEEPA) establishes the framework for the creation and management of Natural Protected Areas, the protection of natural settings of archaeological and historic zones, and areas that are important for indigenous culture and identity. Land-use changes are regulated by the Federal Attorney for Environmental Protection (Procuraduría Federal de Protección al Ambiente, PROFEPA).

The legal protection has been further strengthened by the recently adopted Federal Law for the Protection of the Cultural Heritage of Indigenous and Afro-Mexican Peoples and Communities (2023); the Decree amending, adding, and repealing various provisions of Article 2 of the Political Constitution of the United Mexican States Regarding Indigenous and Afro-Mexican Peoples and Communities (2024); and the Decree recognizing, protecting, preserving, and safeguarding the sacred places and pilgrimage routes of the Wixárika, Náayeri, O'dam or Au'dam, and Mexikan Indigenous Peoples, and creating the Presidential Commission for its compliance (2023).

A Management Unit will be established to coordinate the management of the serial property and the implementation of the Integrated Management, Conservation and Safeguarding Plan (2024-2030), which has a biocultural approach. This plan establishes guidelines for protecting and managing the serial property and was developed in collaboration with the Wixárika communities, federal, state and local authorities, and the organisation Conservación Humana A.C, reflecting an inclusive and participatory approach. A protection and monitoring system is in place, managed by the Wixárika Regional Council (Consejo Regional Wixárika, CRW).

Activities 1
Culture|2030 Indicators National Profile of the Mexico
News  1
UNESCO World Heritage: 26 new sites inscribed
17 July 2025
Mexico
Date of Inscription: 2025
Criteria: (iii)(vi)
Property : 135,420.64 ha

Buffer zone: 513,966.18 ha
Dossier: 1704
Serial: yes

Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026