World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Rila Monastery
Rila Monastery
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Assistance
Rila Monastery

Rila Monastery was founded in the 10th century by St John of Rila, a hermit canonized by the Orthodox Church. His ascetic dwelling and tomb became a holy site and were transformed into a monastic complex which played an important role in the spiritual and social life of medieval Bulgaria. Destroyed by fire at the beginning of the 19th century, the complex was rebuilt between 1834 and 1862. A characteristic example of the Bulgarian Renaissance (18th–19th centuries), the monument symbolizes the awareness of a Slavic cultural identity following centuries of occupation.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

In its complicated ten-century history the Rila monastery has been the hub of a strong spiritual and artistic influence over the Eastern Orthodox world during medieval times (11th-14th c.). Under Ottoman rule (1400-1878) the monastery influenced the development of the culture and the arts of all Christian nations within the Ottoman Empire. With its architecture, frescos etc. it represents a masterpiece of the creative genius of the Bulgarian people.

Architectural styles have been preserved on the property as historical monuments of considerable time span (11th-19th c.). The basic architectural appearance is now one of the peak examples of building craftsmanship of the Balkan peoples from the early 19th c. As such it has exerted considerable influence on architecture and aesthetics within the Balkan area.

Criterion (vi): Rila Monastery is considered a symbol of the 19th Century Bulgarian Renaissance which imparted Slavic values upon Rila in trying to reestablish an uninterrupted historic continuity.

Integrity

There have been no substantial changes to the integrity of the property since its inscription on the World Heritage List. Planned conservation works, that also involve the medieval and renaissance wood-carving and mural paintings existing in associated churches and chapels of the monastery complex, are being pursued to ensure their proper preservation. Protecting the Monastery from 'force effects' is also of major significance. A series of permanent geological engineering observations are being pursued, with associated report recommendations for "ground-structure" strengthening. Based on these results, other preservation and restoration works will be determined. A development plan is being prepared, and this will propose improvements for the communication and technical infrastructure to assist in preserving the property.

Authenticity

Rila Monastery is the most important spiritual and literary center of the Bulgarian national revival, with an uninterrupted history from the Middle Ages until present times. Reconstruction work was required following a fire, and sections of the monastery, a new church and other structures date to the 18th century. The property fully endorses authenticity requirements regarding location, context, concept, usage, function and tradition, where the spirit and feeling of the site are also properly preserved.

Protection and management requirements

The management is carried out on the basis of:

- Religious Affairs Law - Property Law

- Cultural Heritage Law (Official Gazette No 19 of 2009), and the by-law normative act, regulates the research, studying, protection and promotion of the immovable cultural heritage in Bulgaria, and the development of Conservation and Management plans for its inscribed World Heritage List of immovable cultural properties.

- Legislative regimes for the preservation of the site and its buffer zone are in accordance, with a written statement from the 7.05.1992, of a Commission, appointed with an Order № RD-19-132/24.03.1992 of the Ministry of Culture. In addition to regulating the prohibitions, this also identifies allowed activities in the property and its buffer zone, and sets out the responsibilities of the interested parties, including the state, local institutions and owners.

- The Protected areas Law (Official Gazette No133 of 1998 with amendments) - National Park Rila; Natural Park "Rila Monastery"; Rila Monastery Forest, was proclaimed for natural reserve in 1986;

- Forest law (Official Gazette No125 of 1997 with amendments);

- Management plan of Nature Park "Rila Monastery" has been operational since 2003.

In order to maintain the proper conservation of the monastery, there is a need to implement the development plan of the property.

Links
Bulgaria Monasteries

Official web page of the Rila Monastery

National Museum of History

Bulgarian Monastery

Media
play_arrow NHK World Heritage 100 Series
play_arrow Rila Monastery (UNESCO/NHK)
Bulgaria
Date of Inscription: 1983
Criteria: (vi)
Property : 10.7 ha

Buffer zone: 1,289.7 ha
Dossier: 216
Serial: yes

Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

1994 1992
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026