World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Natural and Culturo-Historical Region of Kotor
Natural and Culturo-Historical Region of Kotor
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Assistance
Natural and Culturo-Historical Region of Kotor

In the Middle Ages, this natural harbour on the Adriatic coast in Montenegro was an important artistic and commercial centre with its own famous schools of masonry and iconography. A large number of the monuments (including four Romanesque churches and the town walls) were seriously damaged by the 1979 earthquake but the town has been restored, largely with UNESCO’s help.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The Natural and Culturo-Historical Region of Kotor is located in the Boka Kotorska Bay, on the Adriatic coast of Montenegro. The property encompasses the best preserved part of the bay covering its inner south-eastern portion. The inscribed property comprises 14,600 ha with a landscape composed of two interrelated bays surrounded by mountains rising rapidly to nearly 1,500 metres. The property is linked to the rest of the Boka Kotorska Bay through a narrow channel forming the principal visual central axis of the area.

The Outstanding Universal Value of the Culturo-Historical Region of Kotor is embodied in the quality of the architecture in its fortified and open cities, settlements, palaces and monastic ensembles, and their harmonious integration to the cultivated terraced landscape on the slopes of high rocky hills. The Natural and Culturo-Historical Region of Kotor bears unique testimony to the exceptionally important role that it played over centuries in the spreading of Mediterranean cultures into the Balkans.

Criterion (i): It is the gathering on the gulf coast of the monuments of the cities, their harmony with the landscape, and their insertion in town planning of great value that contributes to the Outstanding Universal Value of the property.

Criterion (ii): As the main bridge-heads of Venice on the South coast of the Adriatic, the aristocratic cities of captains and ship-owners of Kotor and its neighbours were the heart of the region's creative movement for many centuries. Its art, goldsmith and architecture schools had a profound and durable influence on the arts of the Adriatic coast.

Criterion (iii): The successful harmonization of these cities with the Gulf, their quantity, quality and diversity of the monuments and cultural properties, and especially the exceptional authenticity of their conservation, mean that the property can effectively be considered as unique.

Criterion (iv): Kotor and Perast are highly characteristic and authentically preserved small cities enhanced by architecture of great quality. Their town-planning is well adapted to and integrated in the landscape. .

Integrity

The property maintains the overall integrity of the historical layout of the land and seascape with its cities and settlements of distinctive town planning that developed along the coast of the bay, separated by green and cultivated areas framed by steep rocky hills, and a narrow area of urbanized coast connected by the sea. The network of paths and roads connecting coastal settlements with each other and with the inland, and the coastline with pontas and mandrachi, is preserved, which testifies to the important role of the sea.

However, the conditions of integrity are endangered by development and urbanisation caused by ongoing transformation processes in the socio-economic structure of the area. Current developments, including new tourism centres, roads, and buildings on the coast itself, threaten to lead to the gradual yet irreversible transformation of the coastline as well as the abandonment of the traditional terraced structures.

Management of the property and its defined buffer zone will be crucial to maintain the property and its integrity as a unique cultural landscape and an entity in geographical, historical, and cultural terms. Enforcement of regulatory measures for the buffer zone and the development of an integrated approach to conservation, planning and management of the area as a unity will also be required.

Authenticity

Although seriously damaged by the 1979 earthquake, the principal monuments and historic urban areas have been carefully restored and reconstructed under the auspices of UNESCO, and have retained their architectural, urban, and historical authenticity.

However, the ability of the overall landscape to reflect its value is being compromised by the gradual erosion of traditional practices and ways of life and of the harmony between the buildings, planning and landscape.

Protection and management requirements

At the time of the inscription, immediately following the 1979 earthquake, the protection, reconstruction, and management of the cultural monuments and historic urban areas of Boka Kotorska Bay were guaranteed by the Montenegrin Republic Institute for the Protection of Cultural Monuments. After the 1979 earthquake, the management of the whole region was carried out within the Southern Adriatic Development Plan, which was developed with the help of the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). The programs included the preservation, presentation and rehabilitation of cultural monuments in the old towns and settlements. At the same time, industrial facilities (4 factories) that conflicted with the character of the property were cleared. In 1980, the Municipal Institute for Protection of Cultural Heritage was established with its seat in the Old Town of Kotor, for the purpose of management and conservation of the property. In 1992, it was transformed into the Regional Institute for the entire area of the bay including the municipalities of Kotor, Tivat and Herceg Novi. Since the end of 2011, conservation work, field studies and preparation of conservation guidelines for the municipalities of Kotor, Tivat, Herceg Novi and Budva have been undertaken by the Directorate for Protection of Cultural Heritage of Montenegro and the Centre for Conservation and Archaeology of Montenegro through their local offices in Kotor. The post-earthquake reconstruction has been completed, and the conservation and management of the monuments and historic centres of Kotor and Perast are carried out with high professional competence. The need to prevent excessive and uncontrolled urbanization led to the development of the Management Plan of the protected area, which was adopted by the Montenegrin Government in 2011. At the same time, a new legal framework for the area of cultural heritage conservation was created with the Law on Protection of Cultural Properties (2010), which prescribed integrated protection of the property and its buffer zone. The Law on Protection of the Natural and Culturo-Historic Region of Kotor (2013) makes provisions for the establishment of the Council for Management of the Kotor Region, with the role of coordinating conservation, preservation and management of the property. In addition, with the buffer zone defined in 2011 encompassing the entire area of the Boka Kotorska Bay, the groundwork has been laid to treat this cultural landscape in an integrated manner through spatial and development plans. However, increased awareness to treat the inscribed property and the buffer zone as an integral part of the unique cultural landscape of the Boka Kotorska Bay is needed. Challenges remain for the further definition of common development strategies for the property and its buffer zone, for integrated planning and for the establishment of an overall management system. These measures will be essential to ensure that uncontrolled and excessive urbanization, as well as infrastructure development, are adequately addressed to ensure that no adverse impacts to the Outstanding Universal Value of the property occur. Adequate and sufficient resources of the entities responsible for the property will also need to be secured to be able to carry out preservation, protection and enhancement of the property.

Links
 View photos from OUR PLACE the World Heritage collection

Region of Kotor, Yugoslavia (History Channel)

Virtual Tour of Kotor

Official web site of the City of Kotor

Historical Archives Kotor

Photographs of Kotor (Historical Archives Kotor)

Activities 1
World Heritage Cities Programme
Events  1
Management Plan Workshop - Natural and Culturo-Historical Region of Kotor World Heritage site
9 Jan 2006 - 15 Jan 2006
Media
play_arrow Natural and Culturo-Historical Region of Kotor (UNESCO/NHK)
Montenegro
Date of Inscription: 1979
Minor boundary modification inscribed year: 2012, 2015
Criteria: (i)(ii)(iii)(iv)
Property : 14,600 ha

Buffer zone: 36,491 ha
Dossier: 125ter
Boka Kotorska (Bay of Kotor), City of Kotor and surrounding territory, Republic of Montenegro
N42 28 59.988 E18 41 60
List of World Heritage in Danger

Inscription Year on the List of World Heritage in Danger

1979 -2003
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2025 2024 2023 2021 2019 2018 2016 2014 2012 2009 2008 2007 2006 2005 2004 2003 2002 1995 1979
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026