World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Tombs of Buganda Kings at Kasubi
Tombs of Buganda Kings at Kasubi
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Assistance
Tombs of Buganda Kings at Kasubi

The Tombs of Buganda Kings at Kasubi constitute a site embracing almost 30 ha of hillside within Kampala district. Most of the site is agricultural, farmed by traditional methods. At its core on the hilltop is the former palace of the Kabakas of Buganda, built in 1882 and converted into the royal burial ground in 1884. Four royal tombs now lie within the Muzibu Azaala Mpanga, the main building, which is circular and surmounted by a dome. It is a major example of an architectural achievement in organic materials, principally wood, thatch, reed, wattle and daub. The site's main significance lies, however, in its intangible values of belief, spirituality, continuity and identity.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The Tombs of Buganda Kings constitute a site embracing 26.8 hectares of Kasubi hillside within Kampala City.

The site is the major spiritual centre for the Baganda where traditional and cultural practices have been preserved. The Kasubi Tombs are the most active religious place in the kingdom, where rituals are frequently performed. Its place as the burial ground for the previous four kings (Kabakas) qualifies it as a religious centre for the royal family, a place where the Kabaka and his representatives carry out important rituals related to Buganda culture. The site represents a place where communication links with the spiritual world are maintained.

Its spatial organization, starting from the border of the site marked with the traditional bark cloth trees, leading through the gatehouse, the main courtyard, and culminating in the large thatched building, housing the tombs of the four Kabakas, represents the best existing example of a Baganda palace/burial site.

At its core on the hilltop is the main tomb building, locally referred to as the "Muzibu-Azaala-Mpanga" which is a masterpiece of this ensemble. A tomb building has been in existence since the 13th century. The latest building was the former palace of the Kabakas of Baganda, built in 1882 and converted into the royal burial ground in 1884. Four royal tombs now lie within the Muzibu-Azaala-Mpanga.

The main tomb building, which is circular and surmounted by a dome, is a major example of an architectural achievement that was raised with use of vegetal materials comprised of wooden poles, spear grass, reeds and wattle. Its unusual scale and outstanding details bear witness to the creative genius of the Baganda and as a masterpiece of form and craftsmanship, it is an exceptional surviving example of an architectural style developed by the powerful Buganda Kingdom since the 13th Century.

The built and natural elements of the Kasubi Tombs site are charged with historical, traditional, and spiritual values. The site is a major spiritual centre for the Baganda and is the most active religious place in the kingdom. The structures and the traditional practices that are associated with the site are one of the exceptional representations of the African culture that depict a continuity of a living tradition. The site's main significance lies in its intangible values of beliefs, spirituality, continuity and identity of the Baganda people. The site serves as an important historical and cultural symbol for Uganda and East Africa as a whole.

Criterion (i): The Kasubi Tombs site is a master piece of human creativity both in its conception and its execution.

Criterion (iii): The Kasubi Tombs site bears eloquent witness to the living cultural traditions of the Baganda.

Criterion (iv): The spatial organization of the Kasubi Tombs site represents the best extant example of a Baganda palace/architectural ensemble. Built in the finest traditions of Ganda architecture and palace design, it reflects technical achievements developed over many centuries.

Criterion (vi): The built and natural elements of the Kasubi Tombs site are charged with historical, traditional, and spiritual values. It is a major spiritual centre for the Baganda and is the most active religious place in the kingdom.

Integrity (2010)

The boundary of the land on which the tombs are located is clearly marked with the traditional bark cloth tree (Ficus sp.) and coincides with the 1882 traditional boundary. The live markers have been useful in keeping away land encroachers for housing construction and other developments, thus maintaining the original land size. The architectural palace design that comprise of the placement of the buildings, and tombs/ grave yards of members of the royal family around the Muzibu-Azaala- Mpanga reflecting the traditional palace structure is still being maintained in its original ensemble.

Although the recent fire tragedy, that destroyed the main tomb building, means that one key attribute is now missing, the cultural traditions associated with building in poles, spear grass, reeds and wattle are still vibrant and will allow the recreation of this tomb building.

The other traditional structures are still in place and the key attributes related to traditional ceremonial and religious practices and land tenure and land use practices are still being maintained.

 Authenticity (2010)

The authenticity of the Tombs of the Kings of Buganda at Kasubi is reflected in the continuity of the traditional and cultural practices that are associated with the site. The original burial system of the Kabakas of Buganda is still being maintained. The placement of Muzibu-Azaala- Mpanga in the middle of other buildings around the large central courtyard (Olugya), with a forecourt containing the drum house and entry gate house, are a typical ensemble of the Buganda Kingdom palace. The practice of using grass thatched roof resting on structural rings of palm tree fronds is still being maintained as well as the internal elements and finishing materials such as the long wooden poles wrapped in bark cloth decoration. Although the authenticity of the site has been weakened by the loss to the fire of the main tomb structure, the building's traditional architectural craftsmanship and the required skills are still available to allow it to be recreated. This factor, coupled with the extensive documentation of the building, will allow an authentic renewal of this key attribute.

Protection and management requirements (2010)

Managed by the Buganda Kingdom, the property was gazetted a protected site under Statutory Instrument No. 163 of 1972 and under Historical Monument Act (Act 22 of 1967). This legal status was further strengthened by the National Constitution (1995). The Historical Monument Act protects the Kasubi Tombs from residential encroachment or any other purpose inconsistent with its character. The land that hosts the Tombs is titled under the Land Act (1998). The land title is registered in trust of the Kabaka (King) on behalf of the Kingdom.

The protection of the site is further strengthened by the various Tourism Policies of Uganda. The site has an approved General Management Plan (2009 - 2015). A Site Manager is in place.

The greatest threat to the site is fire. There is a need to develop a detailed Risk Management Plan to address this threat, in particular, and to ensure that site documented is as complete as possible and securely stored.

In order to ensure that the traditional building processes associated with the site are maintained over time, there is an on-going need to train young educated people.

There is a need to ensure that the principles guiding the recreation of the main tomb building are agreed by all the key stakeholders - the UNESCO World Heritage Committee, the Buganda Kingdom and the Government of the Republic of Uganda, and that the process of recreating the building is systematic, based on evidence and adequately recorded.

Activities 2
World Heritage Earthen Architecture Programme (WHEAP)
Promoting the application of the Historic Urban Landscape (HUL) to safeguard heritage in the urban context in Africa: Tombs of Buganda Kings at Kasubi (Uganda) and Royal Palaces of Abomey (Benin)
News  17
UNESCO, ICCROM and EPA train African site managers on Disaster Risk Management strategies and Protection Systems
23 December 2024
2023: A new important step in the protection and promotion of Africa's World Heritage
9 October 2023
Uganda’s Tombs of the Kings of Buganda at Kasubi removed from the List of World Heritage in Danger
12 September 2023
Workshop on Re-discovering African heritage through the lense of the 2011 Recommendation on the Historic Urban Landscape
4 August 2023
More add
Uganda
Date of Inscription: 2001
Criteria: (i)(iii)(iv)(vi)
Property : 26.8 ha

Dossier: 1022
Kampala District
N0 19 46.97 E32 33 15.16
List of World Heritage in Danger

Inscription Year on the List of World Heritage in Danger

2010 -2023
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2025 2023 2021 2019 2018 2017 2016 2015 2014 2013 2012 2011 2010
Protections
by other conservation instruments

1 protection / 1 element

2003 Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage (1 element)

Barkcloth making in Uganda

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026