World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
National Archaeological Park Tak’alik Ab’aj
National Archaeological Park Tak’alik Ab’aj
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
National Archaeological Park Tak’alik Ab’aj
Tak’alik Ab’aj is an archaeological site located on the Pacific Coast of Guatemala. Its 1,700-year history spans a period that saw the transition from the Olmec civilization to the emergence of Early Mayan culture. Tak’alik Ab’aj had a primary role in this transition, in part because it was vital to the long-distance trade route that connected the Isthmus of Tehuantepec in today's Mexico to present-day El Salvador. Ideas and customs were shared extensively along this route. Sacred spaces and buildings were laid out according to cosmological principles, and innovative water management systems, ceramics, and lapidary art can be found. Today, Indigenous groups of different affiliations still consider the site a sacred place and visit it to perform rituals.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Tak'alik Ab'aj is an archaeological site located in the piedmont of the Pacific Coast of Guatemala. Its 1,700-year history spans the years from 800 BCE to 900 CE. The first half of that period saw the transition from the Olmec civilization to the emergence of the Early Mayan culture. Tak'alik Ab'aj was an important protagonist and catalyst in this transition, in part due to the vital role it played in the long-distance trade route connecting the Isthmus of Tehuantepec, in present-day Mexico, with present-day El Salvador. Ideas and customs were widely shared along this route. Indications of this exchange are the diversity of sculptural styles found at Tak'alik Ab'aj, which surpasses that of other sites in Mesoamerica, as well as the presence of lapidary art, ceramic and lithic artefacts from sites, in some cases, hundreds of kilometres away. At the archaeological site, innovative water management systems were found, and sacred spaces and buildings were designed according to cosmological principles.

Criterion (ii): Tak'alik Ab'aj played a key role in an important ancient long-distance trade route. Through the exchange of ideas, materials, and goods, it received and disseminated many of the most advanced ideas of urbanism, monumental arts and architecture, as well as water management, which were expressed in the layout, architecture and sculptural programme of the property. The architecture and urban layout were based on ancestral cosmological precepts and the spaces created were used as ritual settings for the public performances of the first rulers of the incipient kingdoms during the Preclassic period. In addition, the quantity and diversity of stone sculptures, combined with the evidence of advances in early writing, mathematics and calendrical systems found at the property, from the Preclassic period onwards, reflect the richness and diversity of cultural expressions resulting from contact with distant peoples and cultures, as well as from the transition from Olmec to Mayan cultural expressions.

Criterion (iii): Tak’alik Ab’aj is an outstanding example of the early development and use of many important cultural traditions, some of them now considered as representative of Mesoamerica, including the symbolic representation of the astronomical observations and their expression in urban planning and design, calendrical system, and hieroglyphic writing. Additionally, the re-use and re-combination of sculptures from different styles and earlier eras including, for example, sculptures of Olmec and Maya cultures, is an outstanding example of the creation of public displays or architectonic scenarios.

Integrity

The integrity of Tak’alik Ab’aj is centred on the intactness of the archaeological evidence pertaining to the Central Group of the larger archaeological site. The attributes referred to here are the transition from Olmec to Mayan cultural expressions, the urban layout based on cosmological precepts and astronomical orientations, as well as the distribution of sculptures, the structures and sacred spaces for ritual representations. The archaeological site is intact and is not subject to great pressures. After its abandonment around 900 CE, the property was reclaimed by dense vegetation, and in more recent times, coffee, rubber and sugar cane plantations were created, but they do not reach archaeological levels in the soil. The excavations have uncovered largely intact contexts, and the documentation and inventory of the finds have created a very comprehensive archaeological record. The boundaries of the property have been drawn to encompass features located in the Central Group, which is considered to be the ceremonial heart of Tak’alik Ab’aj. However, a possible extension of the site, depending on further archaeological finds, could be envisaged in the future.

Authenticity

The authenticity of Tak’alik Ab’aj lies in its ability to express its cultural values truthfully and credibly through its attributes. The conditions of authenticity of the archaeological site have been met in terms of its location and setting, forms and designs, materials and substances. Today, indigenous groups of the twenty-two different Mayan language affiliations still consider the site a sacred place and visit it to perform rituals. The continued use of the property as a pilgrimage site for Indigenous spiritual guides (Ajq’ijab’) reinforces the authenticity of the archaeological park. The archaeological remains that convey the Outstanding Universal Value (buildings, sculptures, and artefacts) had not been disturbed prior to excavation. A special ecological conservation program is carried out at the site; the conservation and stabilization of the archaeological remains is done respectfully, using materials directly from the area. The restored drainage channels are still in use and prevent the accumulation of rain water in the archaeological site.

Protection and management requirements

The National Archaeological Park Tak’alik Ab’aj has been created in 1987. In 1989, the National Council for Protected Areas declared Tak’alik Ab’aj an Area of Special Protection (Law Decree 4-89). In 2002, the archaeological site was declared National Cultural Heritage under the category of National Archaeological Park by the Ministry of Culture and Sports, due to its important archaeological, historical, artistic and cultural values (Ministerial Decree 528-2002). I

t has been funded and managed since its creation by the Ministry of Culture and Sports through the Vice-Ministry and Head Office of Cultural and Natural Heritage / Institute of Anthropology and History. The local management structure of the National Archaeological Park includes a Technical Scientific Coordination section, and a Technical Administrative Coordination section.  Since 2011, the National Archaeological Park has developed and implemented five-year management plans to ensure long-term investigation, conservation, protection, outreach, operation and integrated management. The plans are framed in broader policies and operate in the context of national and municipal plans focused on development, territorial management or tourism.

A Cooperation Agreement, containing specific measures to constitute and guarantee a buffer zone to increase the protection of the National Archaeological Park Tak’alik Ab’aj was signed and is currently in place. This functional instrument provides an additional layer of protection for the site and helps to avoid possible future uses of the land that may have an impact on the Outstanding Universal Value of the property. The establishment of regulations that will allow application of the relevant laws should enhance the protection of the property. Through programs and projects, participation spaces are generated for local and indigenous communities in decision-making processes. The newly proposed non-governmental organisation should strengthen the involvement of the population in the management of the property.

Links
Parque Arqueológico Nacional Tak'alik Ab'aj (Abaj Takalik)

Tak’alik Ab’aj National Archaeological Park's Facebook

Guatemala
Date of Inscription: 2023
Criteria: (ii)(iii)
Property : 15.38 ha

Buffer zone: 1.28 ha
Dossier: 1663
N14 38 19 W91 43 57
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2025
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026