World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
The Cultural Landscape of Al-Faw ...
The Cultural Landscape of Al-Faw Archaeological Area
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
The Cultural Landscape of Al-Faw Archaeological Area

Lying at a strategic point of the ancient trade routes of the Arabian Peninsula, the property was abruptly abandoned around the 5th century CE. Nearly 12,000 archaeological remains have been found, spanning from prehistoric times to the Late pre-Islamic era, testifying to the successive occupation of three different populations and their adaptation to the evolving environmental conditions. Archaeological features include the Palaeolithic and Neolithic tools of early people, tapered structures, cairns and circular constructions, the sacred mountain of Khashm Qaryah, rock carvings, funerary tumuli and cairns in the valley, forts/caravanserai, the oasis and its ancient water management system, and the vestiges of the city of Qaryat al-Faw.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The Cultural Landscape of Al-Faw Archaeological Area is located at the junction of the Empty Quarter Desert and the Wajid sandstone outcrops of the Jabal Tuwayq Plateau and escarpment in the south of Saudi Arabia. It is an exceptional physical testimony to the successive human occupations from the Palaeolithic to the Late pre-Islamic era, showing how different peoples adapted to the evolving natural environment in the inland region of Arabia, which experienced a much wetter climate, before becoming a drier region, and finally one of the driest deserts in the world.

The vast relict cultural landscape encapsulates extremely rich archaeological remains, including the flint tools of the Palaeolithic and Neolithic periods; a huge number of funerary “avenues” of stone structures dating from the second half of the 3rd millennium to the beginning of the 2nd millennium BCE and radiating out from the oasis; and numerous tumuli at the foothills of Jabal Tuwayq dating from 2000-1900 BCE. These are associated with a group of nomads linked to the Gulf and the Mesopotamian civilisation. The remains of the antique caravan city of Qaryat al-Faw and its oasis, which appeared in the middle of the 1st millennium BCE and lasted almost a millennium until the irreversible depletion of water resources led to its abandonment in the 5th century CE, exhibit a rich urban and architectural legacy, with a vast irrigation network and a large area of ancient plantation pits to sustain the oasis economy. As an important caravan relay on the route leading from Najran to central and eastern Arabia, the forts/caravanserais, commercial quarters, residential areas, and necropolises bear witness to a thriving and cosmopolitan caravan city and the capital of the kingdom of Kinda, a federal organisation of Arabian desert tribes. The presence of various groups is manifested by the linguistic diversity of inscriptions and rock carvings found at the sacred mountain of Khashm Qaryah and in the residential areas and necropolises.

Criterion (ii): The Cultural Landscape of Al-Faw Archaeological Area exhibits an important interchange of human values, from the middle of the 1st millennium BCE to the 5th century CE, between the southern Arabian Peninsula, the Red Sea, and Yemen, as well as the Northwest of Arabia, the Fertile Crescent, and the Mediterranean world, and finally the Gulf region, Mesopotamia, and Persia in the east. The rich collection of archaeological findings and inscriptions is a tangible manifestation of the role of the site as an important meeting place for different groups of people who built the caravan city of Qaryat al-Faw and the influences and cultural exchanges between the tribes of the desert and the trading groups that occupied and resided in the area over time.

Criterion (v): The Cultural Landscape of Al-Faw Archaeological Area is an outstanding example of traditional human settlement and land use over millennia. The large quantity and diversity of archaeological remains provide valuable information that demonstrates the variety of ways in which humans have interacted with the environment for millennia, taking advantage of the natural conditions at different times. It also illustrates the vulnerability of human settlement and land use under the impact of irreversible climate change.

Integrity

The vast property area includes all the archaeological remains, such as the Palaeolithic and Neolithic stone tools; the tapered structure; cairns and circular constructions; the rock inscriptions, paintings, and engravings on the cliff of the sacred mountain of Khashm Qaryah and other parts of the property; the huge number of tumuli and cairns in the valley; the forts/caravanserais; the oasis and its water management system; and the ruin of the City of Qaryat. These archaeological remains, together with the landscape in the property area, testify to the multifaceted cultures and belief systems of the populations that once occupied the site, their interaction with both the environment and with other parts of the world through trade, political, and military activities. Preserved by the desert environment since the site was abandoned in the 5th century CE, the archaeological resources have remained intact. While a few factors affect the property, such as the natural deterioration of the exposed archaeological remains and farming in the buffer zone, these factors are under control thanks to preventive interventions and legal provisions.

Authenticity

Encapsulated by the desert environment, the property remained as it was after its abrupt abandonment in the 5th century CE. With all the archaeological structures and remains undisturbed by human activities, only slow natural deterioration occurred over time. The natural setting and the landscape in the property have undergone a certain degree of natural evolution, such as the collapse of some parts of the cliff, which buried some tumuli and cairns at the escarpment. While considering that the natural deterioration of the archaeological remains and the natural evolution of the landscape are also part of the authentic process of the history of the site, the source of information preserved at the property is credible.

Protection and management requirements

The property is registered as a National Heritage Site and is protected under the Law of Antiquities, Museums and Urban Heritage. The escarpment and the plateau are also protected under the Protected Areas Law as part of the ‘Uruq Bani Mu’arid Protected Area. Tribal law helps to protect the landscape from disturbance. The property is entirely state-owned. The vast buffer zone encompasses a significant stretch of the cliff, escarpment, and desert and is mostly composed of public lands. It provides an additional layer of protection to the cultural landscape, while the Respect Zone adds another layer of protection to the visual quality of the landscape, preventing the property from future encroachment by farming and other types of development.

Responsibility for managing the property is shared between the Heritage Commission of the Saudi Ministry of Culture and the National Centre for Wildlife. A joint management framework is being established to coordinate the efforts of the cultural and natural conservation sectors. This framework is guided by the Management Charter and is supported by the Higher Committee, the Scientific Committee, and the Local Committee. The management plan is a contractual agreement and a collective commitment of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the Ministry of Culture, the Heritage Commission, the National Centre for Wildlife, and the local authorities concerned. It is a guiding document for the medium- and long-term protection, conservation, management, and monitoring of the property. The Heritage Impact Assessment mechanism has been embedded in the management system, and the decision-making process is accessible to the local communities. Future research is planned on both the archaeology of the property and the artefacts retrieved during the excavations. Tourism management is at an incipient stage, and the presentation and interpretation of the values of the site should be improved by placing the narratives in the regional context.

News  1
UNESCO World Heritage: 24 new sites inscribed
1 August 2024
Saudi Arabia
Date of Inscription: 2024
Criteria: (ii)(v)
Property : 4,847.73 ha

Buffer zone: 27,548.33 ha
Dossier: 1712
N19 45 53.7 E45 9 48.2
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
Protections
by other conservation instruments

1 protection / 1 element

1972 World Heritage Convention (1 element)

‘Uruq Bani Ma’arid

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026