World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Xixia Imperial Tombs
Xixia Imperial Tombs
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Xixia Imperial Tombs

Located in the foothills of the southern Helan Mountains in Ningxia, this necropolis is the imperial cemetery of the Xixia Dynasty. It includes nine imperial mausoleums, 271 subordinate tombs, a northern architectural complex, and 32 flood control structures. Founded by the Tanguts in 1038, the Xixia Dynasty lasted until its destruction by Genghis Khan’s Mongol army in 1227. Positioned along the Silk Road, it became a multicultural civilization modelled on Chinese imperial traditions, with Buddhism at its core. The property reflects the dynasty’s religious and socio-political legacy.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The Xixia Imperial Tombs are a necropolis of the Xixia Dynasty, located in the Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region of north-west China, in the foothills of the Helan Mountains, and formed from the 11th to 13th centuries. Comprising nine imperial mausoleums, 271 subordinate tombs, a northern architectural complex and thirty-two flood control works, this necropolis is a unique testimony to the Xixia Dynasty and its imperial lineage, which lasted nearly 200 years and was established by the Tanguts, nomadic herdspeople who settled in a region crossed by the Silk Road, and brought together a diverse population composed, in addition to the Tanguts, of Han, Tubo, Uighur, Khitan and Jurchen peoples.

Through contact with merchants, caravans, monks and nomads, the Tanguts developed a civilisation based on the Chinese imperial model, of which Buddhism was an essential part. This is evidenced by very large, diverse architectural sites, as well as a wealth of objects excavated at the property, including fragments of stelae in Tangut script.

Criterion (ii): The Xixia Imperial Tombs bear witness to cultural and religious influences from multiple sources, ranging from the traditions of the Song and Tang dynasties to the beliefs and funerary customs of the Tanguts, where adherence to Buddhism dominated and ancestral traditions persisted. These characteristics are fully reflected in the spatial organisation, design and architecture of the Xixia funerary complex.

Criterion (iii): The Xixia Imperial Tombs illustrate the spiritual and cultural originality of the Xixia Dynasty and the Tangut people. This civilisation developed for nearly 200 years in contact with the Silk Road through cultural and commercial exchange in north-west China, from the 11th to the 13th century.

Integrity

The property contains the only imperial tombs identified in the territory of the Tanguts that are associated with a set of subordinate tombs and supplementary constructions and works, allowing for a complete representation of the property and its architectural features in its historical setting. The remains forming the necropolis are in a generally good state of conservation, and the main factors affecting the property are the effects of climate change, tourism and urban growth. The boundaries are adequate, and the buffer zone provides an additional layer of protection.

Authenticity

The property is located in an unspoiled natural desert setting. Its visual and spiritual connection to the Helan Mountains is also preserved. Each tomb, whether a mausoleum or a subordinate tomb, the flood control works and the architectural complex are preserved in place in their original location and have retained enough materials to remain coherent.

Protection and management requirements

The property has been a National Priority Protected Site since 1988. Its perimeter was declared a conservation area by the regional authorities in 1991. All interventions on the property are governed by the national regime for the protection of cultural relics. A series of laws and regulations complete and strengthen this system.

Four competent administrative authorities are responsible for managing the property: the central government, the Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region, the Yinchuan Municipality and the Yinchuan Xixia Imperial Tombs Management Office, to which is attached the Xixia Imperial Tombs Cultural Tourism Development Co. Ltd. These authorities are tasked with ensuring, each at its own level, compliance with the legislative and regulatory framework for the conservation and management of the property.

To this end, these authorities have adopted the Conservation Plan of Xixia Imperial Tombs (2019-2035), approved and published by the People’s Government of Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region in January 2024. This plan builds on and supplements previous planning arrangements, and provides for a conservation area plan with management rules.

The Conservation and Management Plan of Xixia Imperial Tombs (2023-2035) assesses the state of conservation of the property and provides for enhanced measures as well as the implementation of actions for protection, management, use and research. It also defines a strategy for the coordinated development of heritage protection and its economic and social aspects at the local level. Finally, it provides for a set of measures to take into account natural risks as well as urban or tourism-related pressures.

In addition to these specialised conservation plans, the Territorial Spatial Master Plan of Yinchuan Municipality (2021-2035) integrates the conservation of the Xixia Imperial Tombs within the ecological protection of Helan. It also takes into account the protection of the mountains and the cultural heritage.

These provisions provide legal, institutional, and management guarantees for the protection of the conditions of integrity and authenticity of the property.

News  1
UNESCO World Heritage: 26 new sites inscribed
17 July 2025
China
Date of Inscription: 2025
Criteria: (ii)(iii)
Property : 3,899 ha

Buffer zone: 40,569.5 ha
Dossier: 1736
N38 24 57 E105 58 16
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026