World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Modernist Kaunas: Architecture of Optimism, ...
Modernist Kaunas: Architecture of Optimism, 1919-1939
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Modernist Kaunas: Architecture of Optimism, 1919-1939
This property testifies to the rapid urbanization that transformed the provincial town of Kaunas into a modern city that became Lithuania’s provisional capital between the First and Second World Wars. Its community-driven transformation of an urban landscape was adapted from an earlier town layout. The quality of modern Kaunas was manifested through the spatial organization of the Naujamiestis (New Town) and Žaliakalnis (Green Hill) areas, and in public buildings, urban spaces and residences constructed during the interwar period that demonstrate a variety of styles in which the Modern Movement found architectural expression in the city.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Modernist Kaunas: Architecture of Optimism, 1919-1939 is situated in the centre of the city of Kaunas, in central Lithuania, at the confluence of two major rivers: the Nemunas and the Neris. The area within the property was planned and developed from the mid-19th century, and saw rapid urbanisation and modernisation in 1919–1939 when, after the declaration of an independent Republic of Lithuania in 1918, Kaunas served as the provisional capital of the state. The status of provisional capital was crucial for the city’s unprecedented growth and architectural development, resulting in a seven-fold increase in Kaunas’ area and a substantial population growth. In less than twenty years, under the auspices of the new national government and civic initiative, Kaunas was transformed into a modern city based on the adaptation of an earlier town layout and integration of modernist urban planning solutions and architecture with the pre-existing surrounding natural environment. Modernist Kaunas bears exceptional testimony to a multifaceted modernism as a process of transformation born out of local political and cultural exigencies, and evolutionary urbanisation in the interwar period responding to pre-existing human-made and natural features, the result of which illustrates a local version of the global project of modernity.

The property comprises two areas: Naujamiestis and Žaliakalnis. Naujamiestis (New Town), with an orthogonal grid planned in 1847, is attached to the eastern edge of the Old Town and extends eastwards along the valley of the Nemunas River. Naujamiestis was intensively developed in 1919–1939 and became the administrative centre of Kaunas. It demonstrates well the integration of natural topography into the urban fabric. Encircling Naujamiestis to the north and east is Žaliakalnis (Green Hill), a natural plateau developed as a garden city residential suburb in the interwar period according to a 1923 master plan of Kaunas.

A rich architectural heritage of emerging local inflection of modernism overlaid on the 19th century urban grid and a new garden suburb, all integrated with the surrounding natural environment, created an exceptional ensemble of two complimentary urban landscapes that reflect Lithuania’s response to the encounter with modernity. Circa 1500 of the 6000 remaining buildings erected in Kaunas in 1919–1939 are concentrated in the World Heritage area and represent a local version of early 20th century Eastern and Central European modernism, bearing an exceptional testimony to the process of transformation of an industrial and fortress city into a modern capital of a newly-formed state. The façades, streetscapes, and natural features incorporated into the pre-existing urban and geomorphological setting create a distinctive sense of place exhibited through broad panoramas, open urban and natural spaces, and varied topography. Unlike many experiences of urban and architectural modernity, Kaunas reflects an evolutionary rather than revolutionary process of and response to urbanisation and modernisation in early 20th-century Europe, driven by post-war optimism and civic initiative.

Criterion (iv): Modernist Kaunas is an outstanding example of a historic city centre, subject to rapid urbanisation and modernisation while serving as a provisional capital (1919-1939), that encapsulates diverse expressions of the values and aspirations of the local population to create a modern city driven by post-war optimistic belief in an independent future amid the turbulence of the early 20th-century in Europe, when national borders were changing. As a result of civic initiative, the gradual urban development of Kaunas, carried out with respect to the pre-existing urban context and natural environment, produced a distinctive urban landscape and local modern architectural language that served the needs of a growing population and reflected the modernisation of urban life in the 20th century. It is an exceptional testament to people’s faith in the future and their ability to be creative under difficult political and economic conditions.

Integrity

Modernist Kaunas consists of sections of Naujamiestis and Žaliakalnis, two adjacent districts of the city of Kaunas, that have been preserved sufficiently to reflect the historic urban fabric and urban morphology of the city during the interwar period. The significant architectural structures and the original urban layout, including the characteristic sloping natural and human-made terrain, public spaces and historic parks, have been retained. However, new developments that have been taking place in different parts of the city affecting both physical and visual aspects of the property. Of 6000 surviving buildings constructed in Kaunas in 1919–1939, circa 1500 structures of administrative, public, industrial, and residential functions, including wooden buildings, testifying to the speed and diversity of development undertaken in the spirit of modernity are located within the property, constituting the greatest concentration of significant modernist architecture in the city. The buffer zone contains areas dating to earlier periods of development of Kaunas, as well as groups of buildings of importance and some elements of the natural environment that strengthen the character of the property.

Kaunas lost its status as Lithuania’s provisional capital in 1939. Under the Soviet rule, which lasted from 1944-1990, the physical state of interwar modernist buildings was not deliberately neglected, since the superior quality of the architecture was put to pragmatic use. Intermittent development of the area continued with the construction of many buildings that, although new, were compatible with the interwar period designs by being restrained in volume and form. Construction during this era did not alter in a significant manner the established street grid and squares, but it did see the addition of large modernist buildings that ignored the existing historic urban morphology. The more recent growth of Kaunas and development pressures, especially in the industrial part of Naujamiestis, resulted in partial damage to the urban fabric of this river-side section of the property, including several large structures erected along Karalius Mindaugas avenue (Karaliaus Mindaugo Prospektas).

Authenticity

Because the historically evolved areas of Naujamiestis and Žaliakalnis have changed relatively little, Modernist Kaunas is truly a time capsule of the 1919–1939 period. The location and setting, form and design, material and substance as well as use and function of the property all represent a historic modernist city of the interwar period that evolved harmoniously, integrating the natural and historic settings, producing a diverse legacy of architectural modernism. The area of Naujamiestis is home to the largest concentration of landmark modernist buildings that were part of the formation of a new administrative, cultural, and social core of the Lithuanian state in 1919–1939. Residential areas of Naujamiestis constitute an architectural background for the landmark buildings, creating a harmonious cityscape. The biggest changes can be observed in the southern section of Naujamiestis, whose industrial function has been changing, buildings gradually being converted to commercial and residential purposes.

The recreational function of Žaliakalnis area with Ąžuolynas Park has been retained and is protected by law. Developed as a garden city residential suburb, the key elements of Žaliakalnis designed in 1923 survived to this day and reflect the local interpretation of the garden city urban planning concepts of the time, adjusted to suit pre-existing natural, topographical, and human-made features. The Soviet era policies, however, contributed to alterations of the interiors and communal spaces with the garden city residential suburb, distorting the plot structure in some sections. Subdividing land plots within the listed cultural heritage areas is currently prohibited and density is controlled.

Protection and management requirements

Modernist Kaunas includes a group of areas and buildings in the central part of the city of Kaunas that are legally protected on the national and local level under the Law on the Protection of Immovable Cultural Heritage, which applies to cultural properties listed in the National Register of Cultural Heritage. The Law on Protected Areas, the Law on Territorial Planning, the Law on Construction, the Law on Green Areas, and the Law on Environmental Protection supplement this legislation.

The property is covered by protection assigned to seven sites and complexes listed in the National Register of Cultural Heritage: Naujamiestis, a historic district of Kaunas (National Register of the Cultural Heritage No. 22149); Žaliakalnis 2, a historic district of Kaunas (National Register of the Cultural Heritage No. 22148); Žaliakalnis 1, a historic district of Kaunas (National Register of the Cultural Heritage No. 31280); Kaunas Ąžuolynas Park Complex (National Register of the Cultural Heritage No. 44581); the Kaunas Ąžuolynas Sports Complex (National Register of the Cultural Heritage No. 31618); the Research Laboratory Complex (National Register of the Cultural Heritage No. 28567) and Christ’s Resurrection Church (National Register of the Cultural Heritage No. 16005). Management instruments should be strengthened to protect privately-owned buildings and structures within the property and support the owners in maintaining their properties.

The cultural significance of Modernist Kaunas is integrated into the General Plan of the Territory of Kaunas City, which regulates spatial development in the city and defines urban management issues. The General Plan stipulates restrictions on building activities and traffic flows. The Cultural Strategy approved by the Kaunas City Municipality aims to establish an integrated approach toward the protection of the interwar period heritage of Kaunas. The management plan for the property is regularly revised and approved by the Kaunas City Municipal Council and is well integrated into municipal legislative system as a strategic planning document. The management plan should ensure protection of the full range of attributes that express the Outstanding Universal Value, and set out the conditions for the Heritage Impact Assessment of new development projects and activities that are planned for implantation within or around the property. The preparation of an integrated conservation plan would ensure the conservation of all attributes supporting the Outstanding Universal Value, including wooden architecture.

Lithuania
Date of Inscription: 2023
Criteria: (iv)
Property : 455.3 ha

Buffer zone: 404.18 ha
Dossier: 1661
N54 53 49 E23 55 45
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026