World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Dinosaur Provincial Park
Dinosaur Provincial Park
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Dinosaur Provincial Park

In addition to its particularly beautiful scenery, Dinosaur Provincial Park – located at the heart of the province of Alberta's badlands – contains some of the most important fossil discoveries ever made from the 'Age of Reptiles', in particular about 35 species of dinosaur, dating back some 75 million years.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value
Brief synthesis

Dinosaur Provincial Park contains some of the most important fossil specimens discovered from the “Age of Dinosaurs” period of Earth’s history. The property is unmatched in terms of the number and variety of high quality specimens which, to date, represent more than 44 species, 34 genera and 10 families of dinosaurs, dating back 75-77 million years. The park contains exceptional riparian habitat features as well as badlands of outstanding aesthetic value.

Criterion (vii): Dinosaur Provincial Park is an outstanding example of major geological processes and fluvial erosion patterns in semi-arid steppes. These badlands stretch along 26 kilometers of high quality and virtually undisturbed riparian habitat, presenting a landscape of stark but exceptional natural beauty.

Criterion (viii): The property is outstanding in the number and variety of high quality specimens representing every known group of Cretaceous dinosaurs. The diversity affords excellent opportunities for paleontology that is both comparative and chronological. Over 350 articulated specimens from the Oldman and Dinosaur Park formations including more than 150 complete skeletons now reside in more than 30 major museums. In addition to the significant number of high quality specimens, the property contains a complete assemblage of non-dinosaurian fossil material offering an unparalleled opportunity for the study of the Late Cretaceous paleo-ecosystem.

 Integrity

At 7,825 ha in size, the property encompasses a significant portion of the badlands and riparian habitat elements found in the region. Geological processes that created and continue to be necessary to maintain the badlands landscape occur with virtually no impairment or human interference. The high natural aesthetic qualities of the badlands and riparian areas are largely intact. In many parts of the property few, if any signs of development outside of the World Heritage site’s boundaries are visible.

The known presence of Late Cretaceous fossil material is closely associated with locations where the fossil-bearing formations are exposed through erosional processes. The large majority of these exposures in the region occur within the boundaries of the property. Both the fossil material and the highly valuable associated contextual information are wholly intact. Public access to the most sensitive areas of the site is strictly controlled. Research, collection and removal of fossil material are tightly regulated. Future facility development will only be permitted within the existing facility zone.

Protection of paleontological resources, badlands landforms, and riparian habitat was enhanced in 1992 through an extension of the property of 2033 ha.

Protection and management requirements

The protection and management of the property is enabled through a number of different statutes of the Province of Alberta, notably the Provincial Parks Act and the Historic Resources Act. Strong collaboration with stakeholders and local landowners in relation to management issues is occurring on an ongoing basis. The park’s 2012 Park Management Plan provides guidance in decision-making relating to the day-to-day operation of the park and managing identified issues. The Management Plan establishes a zoning system that restricts unguided public access to the most sensitive areas of the site.

All aspects of the management and operation of the site are overseen by a park manager located on-site. Proactive enforcement of statutes dealing with the protection of fossil resources is carried out by a number of trained staff. Land use activities are actively managed and impacts from visitor activities, facility operations and livestock grazing are being controlled and monitored.

The property is underlain by significant sub-surface petroleum resources. No surface access is granted for hydrocarbon extraction within the property; however, through the use of directional drilling techniques industry is able to access the subsurface resources underlying the property from outside of its boundaries. Hydrocarbon extraction activities that are occurring outside the property are actively managed and closely monitored to ensure that both the visual and environmental impacts are minimized.

Special attention will be given over the long term to monitoring and taking appropriate actions related to a number of factors in and near the property. Specifically, these include the potential development of infrastructure and facilities, livestock grazing, oil and gas extraction, impacts of tourism, visitors and recreation, potential impacts of climate change, as well as illegal removal of paleontological resources from the property.

Links
Facebook page

Royal Tyrell Museum

World Heritage in Canada (Parks Canada)

Dinosaur Provincial Park (Alberta Tourism, Parks, and Recreation)

Dinosaur Provincial Park (Parks Canada)

Protectedplanet.net

Activities 1
Youth Component, 32nd session of the World Heritage Committee (2008)
Media
play_arrow Dinosaur Provincial Park (UNESCO/NHK)
Canada
Date of Inscription: 1979
Criteria: (vii)(viii)
Property : 7,825 ha

Dossier: 71
N50 46 4 W111 29 32
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

1992 1991
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026