World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Jewish-Medieval Heritage of Erfurt
Jewish-Medieval Heritage of Erfurt
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Jewish-Medieval Heritage of Erfurt
Located in the medieval historic centre of Erfurt, the capital city of Thuringia, the property comprises three monuments: the Old Synagogue, the Mikveh, and the Stone House. They illustrate the life of the local Jewish community and its coexistence with a Christian majority in Central Europe during the Middle Ages, between the end of the 11th and the mid-14th century.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Located in the heart of the Old Town of Erfurt in Thuringia, the Jewish-Medieval Heritage of Erfurt comprises the Old Synagogue, the Mikveh and the Stone House, which are rare and exceptionally preserved examples of Central European Jewish buildings that illustrate, in their built fabric, architectural details and decoration programme, the adaptation to the town’s specific spatial and social conditions and the coexistence of a Jewish community with a predominantly Christian society, during the urban development of Erfurt at the crossroads of important commercial routes in Central Europe in the Middle Ages. The property sheds light on the heyday of a Jewish community engaged with trade and exchanges in Central Europe during the Middle Ages, between the late 11th and mid-14th centuries CE, until the Black Death wave of pogroms.

Criterion (iv): The Old Synagogue, the Mikveh and the Stone House of Erfurt are an early and rare testimony to Jewish religious and secular architecture from the Middle Ages in Central Europe. The buildings illustrate the conformity with vernacular architecture and adaptation to local conditions and thus reflect the coexistence with a predominantly Christian society and the heyday of Jewish life in Central Europe’s medieval Erfurt until the wave of pogroms of the mid-14th century.

Integrity

The property includes all attributes necessary to express its Outstanding Universal Value. The former Jewish Quarter, in the buffer zone, with its well-preserved urban layout, medieval built fabric, and street network, includes visual connections and attributes that are functionally important as a support to the property and its protection. The integration of the buildings of the Jewish community into the medieval city is impressively perceivable to this day. They reflect how Jews and Christians lived together in the midst of coexistence, persecution and expulsion in a medieval city in Europe. The three component parts are of adequate size, so the protection of the characteristics and processes, which communicate the Outstanding Universal Value of the property, is guaranteed. The Jewish-Medieval Heritage of Erfurt is not threatened by any adverse developments or neglect.

Authenticity

The form and materials of the Old Synagogue, the Mikveh and the Stone House are largely preserved. Evidence of their construction and use by the Jewish community and Jewish citizens of the city and their conformity with local building traditions and techniques is provided by the preserved original medieval building fabric. The exceptionally well-preserved building fabric of the Old Synagogue mostly dates to the period from around 1100 to the early 14th century, when it was in use as a synagogue. In the Mikveh, the form of the ground plan and room height, as well as the medieval building fabric (12th-14th centuries), have been authentically preserved. Its original function as a ritual bath is fully perceivable. The Stone House is largely preserved in its fundamental structural elements from the 13th century and its unique interior design. The traces of a key event of European history, the wave of pogroms of 1348-1350, are clearly perceivable to this day.

Protection and management requirements

The laws and other regulations of the Federal Republic of Germany and the Free State of Thuringia guarantee the continuous protection of the Jewish-Medieval Heritage of Erfurt. The Old Synagogue, the Mikveh and the Stone House are registered as cultural monuments in the Book of Monuments (Denkmalbuch) of the Free State of Thuringia in accordance with Article 4 of the Protection of Cultural Heritage Act of Thuringia (ThürDSchG). In addition, they are included in the monument ensemble "Old Town of Erfurt", which is also recorded in the Book of Monuments. All measures in the monument ensemble "Old Town of Erfurt", in which the three component parts and the buffer zone are located, require permission from the Local Cultural Protection Authority (Untere Denkmalschutzbehörde). In addition, municipal statutes and planning such as the preservation and design statutes and the Urban Development Concept ensure the sustenance of the Outstanding Universal Value of the property and the protective function of the buffer zone.

The City of Erfurt is responsible for management as the owner of the property. A management plan has been developed as a binding action and planning instrument and will be periodically updated. The Site Coordinator office, backed up by the Steering Group and the Advisory Board, is key to guaranteeing coordination and management effectiveness at the property. A careful strategy for the use, interpretation and communication of the property is crucial for long-term sustenance of its Outstanding Universal Value.

Links
Deutsche UNESCO-Kommission

Germany
Date of Inscription: 2023
Criteria: (iv)
Dossier: 1656
Serial: yes

Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026