World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Río Plátano Biosphere Reserve
Río Plátano Biosphere Reserve
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Assistance
Best Practice
Río Plátano Biosphere Reserve

Located on the watershed of the Río Plátano, the reserve is one of the few remains of a tropical rainforest in Central America and has an abundant and varied plant and wildlife. In its mountainous landscape sloping down to the Caribbean coast, over 2,000 indigenous people have preserved their traditional way of life.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief Synthesis

Located in the Mosquitia region of Northeastern Honduras, Río Plátano Biosphere Reserve is the largest protected area in the country with 350,000 hectares. The property protects the entire watershed of the Río Plátano all the way from the headwaters in the mountains to the river mouth on the Caribbean Coast. Adding to its importance, the property is an integral part of a significantly larger conservation complex encompassing Tawahka Asangni Biosphere Reserve and Patuca National Park, among other protected areas. Taken as a whole, the conservation complex in Northeastern Honduras is contiguous with Bosawas Biosphere Reserve in neighbouring Nicaragua, jointly constituting the largest contiguous forest area in Latin America north of the Amazon. Besides the remarkable dense rainforests in the mountains, there is a highly diverse array of distinct ecosystems in the coastal lowlands, including wetlands, savannah and coastal lagoons. Recognised as a nature conservation gem, the property also harbours notable archaeological and cultural values, with numerous Pre-Columbian sites and petroglyphs, as well as the living cultures of the various local and indigenous communities. Indigenous peoples and peoples of African descent in and around Río Plátano include the Pech, Tawahka, Miskito and Garífuna, living alongside the Mestizo (Ladino) population.

The property boasts an extraordinary diversity of ecosystems and species. For example, 586 species of vascular plants have been reported in the low lands of the reserve. The over 721 species of vertebrates comprise more than half of all mammals known to occur in Honduras and include the critically endangered Mexican Spider Monkey, the endangered Central American Tapir, the vulnerable Giant Anteater and West Indian Manatee, as well as the near-threatened Jaguar and White-lipped Peccary. The endangered Great Green Macaw, the vulnerable Great Curassow and the near-threatened Guiana Crested Eagle and harpy eagle stand out among the impressive 411 documented species of birds. Taken together, reptiles and amphibians total about 108 species, with several species of poisonous snakes and 4 species marine turtles (Loggerhead, Leatherback, green turtle and hawksbill turtle) . Freshwater fish include the economically important migratory Bobo Mullet or Cuyamel.

Criterion (vii): The natural beauty of Río Plátano Biosphere Reserve is a function of the variety of the terrain and landscape types and features. Within its boundaries, the property harbours densely forested mountains reaching 1,418 m.a.s.l. at Punta Piedra, transitioning into savannahs, patches of pine forest and vast wetlands towards the coastal plains of the Caribbean Sea. Along the coast, there are spectacular lagoons, namely Laguna Brus and Laguna Ibans, both full of wildlife, boasting major bird colonies and serving as nurseries for fish and many other forms of aquatic life. Another characteristic element of the landscape are the many rivers and creeks, namely the eponymous Río Plátano and the Sico, Sikre Kipahni, Uhra and Tilasunta Rivers.

Criterion (viii): The property comprises two main geomorphological areas. These are the steep mountain range harbouring the headwaters of Río Plátano and the flat to undulating coastal plains. The latter is composed of terraces of recent marine sediments and partly underlain by a belt of infertile deeply weathered Pleistocene quartz sandy gravels. The Río Plátano meanders for some 45 kilometres through the lowlands forming ox-bow lakes, backwater swamps and natural levees. At about 100 m.a.s.l inland the foothills begin abruptly. The rugged granite mountains, which rise to Punta Piedra at 1,418 m.a.s.l. have many steep ridges, remarkable rock formations such as Pico Dama, a 150 metre pinnacle, and many waterfalls, one reaching 150 metres in height. Two thirds of the Plátano River run through a rugged part of the mountains with long stretches of white water. In one cataract in a deep forested gorge the river disappears under massive boulders. The mountains are part of the Cordillera Central, which corresponds to what was the Honduras Intercontinental Depression, during the Cretaceous period.

Criterion (ix): As one of a quickly decreasing number of major river basins the Plátano River, the heart of the property, continues to flow freely from its mountainous headwaters to the Sea. Along the altitudinal range the property connects a huge variety of very different ecosystems and habitats. The ecological linkages between these ecosystems and corresponding processes continue to be largely intact at the landscape level. Starting from the Caribbean Sea, there are estuarine and marine systems, sandy beaches, coastal lagoons of varying salinity, mangrove swamps, and pine savannah. Along the many rivers and creeks, there are broadleaf gallery forest traversing the savannahs and serving as natural corridors. The bulk of the property, however, are dense tropical rainforests covering the mountain ranges inland with smaller areas of rare elfin forest on the highest ridges.

Criterion (x): As a globally important stronghold of biodiversity Río Plátano harbours at least 586 species of vascular plants in its diverse habitats and there may still be species new to science in remote parts of the property. Across virtually all taxonomic groups, Río Plátano Biosphere Reserve is home to impressive proportions of the fauna of the entire country, in many cases well over half of the number of species occurring. The over 721 species of vertebrates include more than half of all mammals known in Honduras, such as the critically endangered Mexican Spider Monkey, the endangered Central American Tapir, the vulnerable Giant Anteater and the West Indian Manatee, as well as the near-threatened Jaguar and White-lipped Peccary. Other charismatic species are Puma, Ocelot, Jaguarundi and Margay, Neotropical Otter, White-throated Capuchin Monkey and Mantled Howler Monkey. The endangered Great Green Macaw, the vulnerable Great Curassow and Scarlet Macaw and the near-threatened Guiana Crested Eagle and harpy eagle stand out among the impressive 411 documented species of birds, along with Jabiru, King Vulture and the majestic Harpy Eagle. The 108 species of reptiles and amphibians comprise several rare poisonous snakes and 4 species marine turtles (Loggerhead, Leatherback, green turtle and hawksbill turtle)

Integrity

The Reserve contains a rich variety of ecosystems (28 terrestrial ecosystems and 5 coastal marine), habitats and species of global conservation importance. The Plátano River is a major landscape feature and corridor connecting all the landscape elements from the rugged mountains to the coastal plains. Granting a conservation status to the entire watershed from the headwaters to the river mouth is an ideal set-up from a conservation perspective.

Protection and Management requirements

Due to its archaeological importance parts of the Río Plátano basin became subject to protection efforts long before the nature conservation values were formally recognised. In 1960, Ciudad Blanca Archaeological Reserve was created, later re-classified as an Archaeological National Park in 1969, which Río Plátano formally remains to this day. In terms of nature conservation, Río Plátano Biosphere Reserve was originally designated in 1980 by Decree and substantially extended in 1997 by a further Decree. Likewise in 1980, the area was internationally recognized as a biosphere reserve, prior to the inscription on the World Heritage List in 1982. The legal umbrella for all formally protected areas in Honduras is the national General Environmental Law, which establishes the national protected areas system. Further regulations are specified in a corresponding by-law. More recently, the Forest, Protected Areas and Wildlife Law came into force, jointly with the establishment of a new governmental authority for the management and conservation of forests, nature and wildlife. The legal framework supports co-management agreements and involvement of civil society at all levels.

A major management instrument is zonation to distinguish areas requiring strict protection and areas of controlled use of natural resources.

Despite the strong legal protection, Río Plátano Biosphere Reserve has long been suffering from human pressure threatening its integrity. Forests continue to be logged and converted to pasture, agricultural encroachment and illegal resource extraction are widespread. While systematic law enforcement is needed, there is a consensus that addressing the complex environmental challenges requires integrated development strategies, policies and measures for the entire region across sectors and disciplines and involving local communities. The property is located in a remote region of rural poverty, where a balance between conservation and development is needed. Regulation of land tenure and access to resources and effective co-management and sharing of power in decision-making are seen as promising instruments to this effect.

Indigenous peoples in the Mosquitia continue to have a close relationship with their natural environment, as expressed in myths and beliefs but also knowledge and practices. While not a guarantee for sustainable resource use, this can make a valuable contribution to conservation. Ambitious plans for hydroelectric development on nearby rivers may also entail risks for the conservation values and local livelihoods, therefore requiring careful analysis. Future management of Río Plátano Biosphere Reserve should also promote an enhanced understanding and protection of the many archaeological sites hidden in the dense forests.

Links
Protectedplanet.net

Activities 2
Linking Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Tourism at World Heritage Sites
Enhancing our Heritage- Monitoring and managing for success in World Natural Heritage sites
News  3
World Heritage Committee puts Río Plátano Biosphere Reserve on Danger List at the request of Honduras
22 June 2011
Twenty-two new sites inscribed on UNESCO’s World Heritage List, and one deleted during Committee meeting in Christchurch
29 June 2007
Florida Everglades and Río Plátano Biosphere Reserve removed from Danger List
24 June 2007
Honduras
Date of Inscription: 1982
Criteria: (vii)(viii)(ix)(x)
Property : 350,000 ha

Buffer zone: 150,000 ha
Dossier: 196
Northeast of the country in the area known as the “Mosquitia Hondureña”
N15 44 40 W84 40 30
List of World Heritage in Danger

Inscription Year on the List of World Heritage in Danger

2011 - Present 1996 -2007
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2025 2024 2023 2021 2019 2018 2017 2016 2015 2014 2013 2012 2011 2010 2009 2008 2007 2006 2005 2004 2003 2001 2000 1999 1998 1997 1996 1995 1991 1990 1989 1988
Protections
by other conservation instruments

2 protections / 2 elements

Biosphere Reserves (1 element)

Rio Plátano
RAMSAR (1 element)

Laguna de Bacalar

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026