World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
West Norwegian Fjords – Geirangerfjord and ...
West Norwegian Fjords – Geirangerfjord and Nærøyfjord
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
West Norwegian Fjords – Geirangerfjord and Nærøyfjord

Situated in south-western Norway, north-east of Bergen, Geirangerfjord and Nærøyfjord, set 120 km from one another, are part of the west Norwegian fjord landscape, which stretches from Stavanger in the south to Andalsnes, 500 km to the north-east. The two fjords, among the world’s longest and deepest, are considered as archetypical fjord landscapes and among the most scenically outstanding anywhere. Their exceptional natural beauty is derived from their narrow and steep-sided crystalline rock walls that rise up to 1,400 m from the Norwegian Sea and extend 500 m below sea level. The sheer walls of the fjords have numerous waterfalls while free-flowing rivers cross their deciduous and coniferous forests to glacial lakes, glaciers and rugged mountains. The landscape features a range of supporting natural phenomena, both terrestrial and marine, such as submarine moraines and marine mammals.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The starkly dramatic landscapes of Geirangerfjord and Nærøyfjord are exceptional in scale and grandeur in a country of spectacular fjords. Situated in south-western Norway, these fjords are among the world’s longest and deepest, and vary in breadth from just 250 m to 2.5 km wide. Fjord, a word of Norwegian origin, refers to a long, deep inlet of the sea between high cliffs formed by submergence of a glaciated valley. These two West Norwegian fjords are considered to be classic and complementary examples of this phenomenon, a sort of type locality for fjords that still display active geological processes.

Numerous waterfalls and free-flowing rivers, deciduous and coniferous woodlands and forests, glacial lakes, glaciers, rugged mountains and a range of other natural attributes combine towards making Geirangerfjord and Nærøyfjord among the most scenically outstanding landscapes in the world. A serial property covering an area of 122,712 ha, of which 10,746 ha is sea, these two fjords are separated from each other by a distance of 120 km. They form part of the West Norwegian fjord landscape, which stretches 500 km from Stavanger in the south to Åndalsnes in the north-east. Several inhabited villages and valleys are found along the fjords and inside the boundaries, and the landscape is supplemented (although not dominated) by remnants of its human historical past, which adds further interest and value to the property. 

Criterion (vii): The Geirangerfjord and Nærøyfjord areas are considered to be among the most scenically outstanding fjord areas on the planet. Their outstanding natural beauty is derived from their narrow and steep-sided crystalline rock walls that rise up to 1400 m direct from the Norwegian Sea and extend 500 m below sea level. Along the sheer walls of the fjords are numerous waterfalls while free-flowing rivers run through deciduous and coniferous forest to glacial lakes, glaciers and rugged mountains. There is a great range of supporting natural phenomena, both terrestrial and marine such as submarine moraines and marine mammals. Remnants of old and now mostly abandoned transhumant farms add a cultural aspect to the dramatic natural landscape that complements and adds human interest to the area. 

Criterion (viii): The West Norwegian Fjords are classic, superbly developed fjords, considered as the type locality for fjord landscapes in the world. They are comparable in scale and quality to other existing fjords on the World Heritage List and are distinguished by the climate and geological setting. The property displays a full range of the inner segments of two of the world’s longest and deepest fjords, and provides well-developed examples of young, active glaciation during the Pleistocene ice age. The ice- and wave-polished surfaces of the steep fjord sides provide superbly exposed and continuous three-dimensional sections through the bedrock. The record of the postglacial isostatic rebound of the crust and its geomorphic expression in the fjord landscape are significant, and represent key areas for the scientific study of slope instability and the resulting geohazards. 

Integrity

The two fjord areas include all features that typically characterise a fjord landscape and its geological evolution. These include deep rock basins reaching depths far below sea level, prominent rock thresholds, high and steep cliffs, slide scars and avalanche deposits, moraines, till deposits, hanging valleys, so-called fish-hook or agnor valleys (formed by river capture), glaciers, rivers, waterfalls and surrounding mountain and catchment areas. Each fjord has a different morphology and geology and displays a different range of geomorphological features. Taken together, the Nærøyfjord and Geirangerfjord areas provide most of the features in their natural relationship that could be expected of a fjord landscape and its geological evolution. The boundaries of the serial property are appropriately defined to protect the geological features and the areas required to maintain the scenic qualities of the property. Legislation, staffing, budget and institutional structures in place are adequate to ensure its integrity.

Of the 200 fjords along the west coast of Norway, Nærøyfjord and Geirangerfjord are the least affected by human activity such as hydroelectric dams and infrastructure. Peridotite is currently quarried outside, but close to the Geirangerfjord component of the property and plans exists for another quarry nearby. These impacts are localized, and restoration will take place when extraction ceases. Underground extraction of anorthosite takes place in the Nærøyfjord area, and this may expand in the future. Though not directly adjacent to the fjord itself, the plant has a visual impact from the road in the Nærøydalen valley. 

Protection and management requirements

The majority of the property is protected as an IUCN Category V “Protected Landscape” and several small areas within this are Category I “Strict Nature Reserve”. The legislative regulations embodied in the Norwegian Nature Diversity Act provide long-term protection for the full range of natural values. While private lands make up 85% of the property, inhabited parts are carefully controlled under the Planning and Building Act and mechanisms such as County, Municipal and Local Development Plans.

An effective management system includes advisory committees and a management council that meets regularly to facilitate the necessary management cooperation and co-ordination. A “Declaration of Intent” signed by all the relevant national agencies and the Borough Councils, County Councils and County Governors outlines the cooperative measures and “guarantees that the values in the area will endure.”

A comprehensive management plan addresses management objectives and includes guidelines for activities to preserve the Outstanding Universal Value in a long-term perspective. The existing monitoring system needs to be further developed.

Tourism pressures are intense in both fjords, but impacts are limited as most visitors access the property on cruise ships during a short visitor season. Adequate tourism management plans are an important tool for the long-term conservation of the property’s Outstanding Universal Value.

Mining and underground quarrying is a concern, and any expansion of these activities will not be permitted without an environmental impact assessment. This would ensure that any potential impact, including the export of the mined material and the need for related infrastructure, would not affect the property’s Outstanding Universal Value.

Geohazards are a concern for inhabited areas and existing infrastructure within the property. If more measures to protect people’s lives are to be implemented, detailed environmental impact assessments will need to be performed to ensure solutions and measures that will be compatible with the property’s Outstanding Universal Value. Risk-preparedness plans integrated in the overall management plan are essential for this property.

Links
World Heritage sites in Norway (in English, Norwegian Bokmål, and Sami)

Geiranger-Herdalen (in Norwegian only)

West Norwegian Fjords (in English and Norwegian)

Nærøyfjorden verneområdestyre (in Norwegian only)

Norwegian Fjord Centre in Geiranger (in English and Norwegian)

Nærøyfjord area (in English, Norwegian, and German)

Protectedplanet.net

Activities 1
World Heritage Marine Programme
News  9
West Norwegian Fjords piloting the Climate Action Toolkit
20 December 2025
Marine World Heritage: 50 Beacons of Hope in a changing ocean
9 March 2020
Glacier Bay and West Norwegian Fjords sign Partnership Agreement
11 September 2019
Marine World Heritage-inspired artwork to celebrate World Oceans Day
8 June 2018
More add
Media
play_arrow West Norwegian Fjords – Geirangerfjord and Nærøyfjord (UNESCO/NHK)
Norway
Date of Inscription: 2005
Criteria: (vii)(viii)
Property : 122,712 ha

Dossier: 1195
Serial: yes

Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026