World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
City of Verona
City of Verona
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
City of Verona

The historic city of Verona was founded in the 1st century B.C. It particularly flourished under the rule of the Scaliger family in the 13th and 14th centuries and as part of the Republic of Venice from the 15th to 18th centuries. Verona has preserved a remarkable number of monuments from antiquity, the medieval and Renaissance periods, and represents an outstanding example of a military stronghold.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The city is situated in northern Italy at the foot of the Lessini Mountains on the River Adige. It dates from prehistoric times: a small built-up area that developed between the 4th and 3rd century BCE became a Roman municipium in the 1st century BCE after which it rose rapidly in importance. During the 5th century, Verona was occupied by the Ostrogoth Theodoric I, later by the Lombards, and in 774 by Charlemagne. In the early 12th century, it became an independent commune. It prospered under the rule of the Scaliger family and particularly under Cangrande I, falling to Venice in 1405. From 1797, it became part of the Austrian Empire and joined the Kingdom of Italy in 1866.

The core of the city consists of the Roman town nestled in the loop of the river containing one of the richest collections of Roman remains in northern Italy. Surviving remains of this era include the city gate, Porta Borsari, the remains of the Porta Leoni, the Arco dei Gavi, which was dismantled in the Napoleonic period and rebuilt next to Castelvecchio in the 1930s, the Ponte Pietra, the Roman theatre, and the Amphitheatre Arena.

The Scaligers rebuilt the walls during the Middle Ages, embracing a much larger territory in the west and another vast area on the east bank of the river. This remained the size of the city until the 20th century. The heart of Verona is the ensemble consisting of the Piazza delle Erbe (with its picturesque fruit and vegetable market) and the Piazza dei Signori, with historic buildings that include the Palazzo del Comune, Palazzo del Governo, Loggia del Consiglio, Arche Scaligere, and Domus Nova. The Piazza Bra has a number of buildings dating back to different epochs.

Verona’s surviving architecture and urban structure reflects the evolution of this fortified town over its 2,000 year history. 

Criterion (ii): In its urban structure and its architecture, Verona is an outstanding example of a town that has developed progressively and uninterruptedly over 2,000 years, incorporating artistic elements of the highest quality from each succeeding period.

Criterion (iv): Verona represents in an exceptional way the concept of the fortified town at several seminal stages of European history. 

Integrity

The historic city of Verona today contains elements representing its 2,000 year history: the Roman period, Romanesque, Middle Ages and Renaissance which have survived intact until the 19th century. The walls surrounding the city prevented 19th century development such as industry and railroads within the historic city. The urban structure, as a result, shows exceptional coherence and a large degree of homogeneity. Although Verona’s buildings suffered significant damage during World War II, the post-war reconstruction plan (1946) maintained its original structure and the reconstruction process was carried out with utmost care. The role of Professor Piero Gazzola, first President of ICOMOS and Supervisor of the heritage of Verona, was crucial in this process. He was also responsible for the reconstruction of the Roman bridge.

Threats to the historic city are low. Until the late 19th century, river flooding was common but measures put in place at that time have controlled this risk. The city is classified as “low risk” for seismic activity. Moreover, tourism is managed to control risk to historic resources. 

Authenticity

The authenticity of the City of Verona is high. The present city has been an urban settlement on the River Adige for over 2,000 years. The original Roman urban form continues to be evident in the existing street pattern and the city’s historic fabric remained intact until World War II. As far as the fortified town is concerned, the defence system has been well preserved through the continuity of its military use over time. Surviving evidence of the fortified town, such as Roman gates and Renaissance bastions, reflect this long military history.

Interventions of architectural and urban restoration carried out after World War II were based on the established restoration principle, peculiar to the Italian tradition dating back to the mid 19th century, which has always brought the respect for historical and material testimonies to the foreground. Specifically, the principle is designed to preserve the urban structure and the buildings intact, and to create continuity by carefully incorporating the destroyed areas into the urban pattern while meeting the urban restoration criteria. The reconstruction of the Roman bridge, for example, was based on careful documentation and reuse of original materials. 

Protection and management requirements

The property is managed by various public institutions operating at different levels with their own distinct responsibilities. These include the Ministry of Cultural Heritage and Activities that deals with the protection and conservation of cultural heritage through its peripheral offices, and the municipality that defines and carries out the city’s protection and management policies through urban planning programmes and regulations of the activities on the territory.

Listed buildings and monuments in the historic centre are protected under the Cultural Heritage and Landscape Code, the national law for the safeguard of cultural heritage. In compliance with national laws, all physical interventions concerning the cultural heritage are subject to the control of the competent Superintendence (peripheral offices of the Ministry of Cultural Heritage and Activities). Additional forms of protection operate at both the regional and local levels.

Urban and building planning tools operating at the local government level, recognize the boundary of the property and its buffer zone, and formulate a detailed and structured discipline for the historic centre of Verona, aimed at its physical and socio-economic safeguard. In particular, specific building regulations on appropriate interventions are carried out through the classification of all the buildings, whether of value or not, in order to safeguard and enhance the historical, cultural and environmental system as well as to rehabilitate the Historic Town structure.

In addition, the municipal administration has adopted numerous regulations to control conversions within the historic centre, related to different areas such as tourism, commerce, bill posting and traffic.

The municipal administration of Verona includes a UNESCO office that provides coordination and a technical secretariat. The other local institutions (regional and provincial) cooperate in the safeguarding, conservation and management activities by promoting cultural heritage enhancement. An important role is also played by the Diocese of Verona – Cultural Heritage Office, the institution in charge of the Catholic Church Heritage management on behalf of the Ecclesiastical Institution.

The different institutions involved in the management of the site worked together to develop the historic city’s management plan. The Municipality of Verona is responsible for its administration. The plan emerges as a useful tool for creating a sustainable development model able to combine the requests for the safeguarding and conservation of cultural values of the site and its surroundings with tourism development’s contribution to the local economy. The administration of the management plan forms a dynamic process involving several public and private institutions with different interests and competencies. Furthermore, both the tangible and intangible heritage will be enhanced in the medium and long term, by enriching and extending protection and conservation policies.

Links
Comune di Verona - Sito Ufficiale (only in Italian)

Activities 1
World Heritage Cities Programme
News  1
World Heritage Committee Inscribes 61 New Sites on World Heritage List
30 November 2000
Media
play_arrow City of Verona (UNESCO/NHK)
Italy
Date of Inscription: 2000
Criteria: (ii)(iv)
Property : 444.4 ha

Buffer zone: 303.98 ha
Dossier: 797rev
City and Province of Verona, Veneto Region
N45 26 19 E10 59 38
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
Protections
by other conservation instruments

1 protection / 1 element

2003 Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage (1 element)

Tocatì, a shared programme for the safeguarding of traditional games and sports

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026