World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Historical Monuments at Makli, Thatta
Historical Monuments at Makli, Thatta
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Assistance
Historical Monuments at Makli, Thatta

The capital of three successive dynasties and later ruled by the Mughal emperors of Delhi, Thatta was constantly embellished from the 14th to the 18th century. The remains of the city and its necropolis provide a unique view of civilization in Sind.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Near the apex of the delta of the Indus River in Pakistan’s southern province of Sindh is an enormous cemetery possessing half a million tombs and graves in an area of about 10 km2. Massed at the edge of the 6.5 km-long plateau of Makli Hill, the necropolis of Makli – which was associated with the nearby city of Thatta, once a capital and centre of Islamic culture – testifies in an outstanding manner to the civilization of the Sindh from the 14th to the 18th centuries.

The vast necropolis of Makli is among the largest in the world. Kings, queens, governors, saints, scholars, and philosophers are buried here in brick or stone monuments, some of which are lavishly decorated with glazed tiles. Among the outstanding monuments constructed in stone are the tombs of Jam Nizamuddin II, who reigned from 1461 to 1509, and of lsa Khan Tarkhan the Younger and of his father, Jan Baba, both of whose mausolea were constructed before 1644. The most colourful is that of Diwan Shurfa Khan (died in 1638). The unique assemblage of massive structures presents an impressive order of monumental buildings in different architectural styles. These structures are notable for their fusion of diverse influences into a local style. These influences include, among others, Hindu architecture of the Gujrat style and Mughal imperial architecture. Distant Persian and Asian examples of architectural terra-cotta were also brought to Makli and adapted. An original concept of stone decoration was created at Makli, perhaps determined by the imitation of painted and glazed tile models. The historical monuments at the necropolis of Makli stand as eloquent testimonies to the social and political history of the Sindh.

Criterion (iii): The historical monuments at Makli, Thatta testify in an outstanding manner to the civilization of the Sindh region from the 14th to the 18th centuries. The site preserves in a state of exceptional integrity an imposing monumental complex comprised of the remains of the necropolis, massed at the edge of the Makli plateau and covering an area of about 10 km2.

Integrity

Within the boundaries of the property are located all the elements and components necessary to express the Outstanding Universal Value of the property, including the tombs and graves located in the necropolis of Makli. Nevertheless, a number of the historical monuments have reached an advanced stage of degradation. The integrity of the property is threatened by the significant decay caused by the local climatic conditions (earthquakes, variations in temperature, winds containing salts and humidity, heavy rains, natural growth) and the shift of the riverbed. In addition, encroachments and vandalism threaten the site, and damage and loss by pilferage have assumed colossal proportions.

Authenticity

The historical monuments at Makli, Thatta, are authentic in terms of their forms and design, materials and substance, and locations and setting. Because elements of the property are in an advanced state of decay and disintegration, however, the authenticity of the property is threatened, particularly concerning the materials and forms of the monuments. Unless scientific action is taken to reduce the threats to the property, irremediable damage will be caused.

Protection and management requirements

The Historical Monuments at Makli, Thatta, is a protected antiquity in terms of the Antiquities Act, 1975, passed by the Parliament of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan. The Constitution (18th Amendment) Act 2010 (Act No. X of 2010), bestowed the Government of Sindh with full administrative and financial authority over all heritage sites located in its province. The Culture Department of the Provincial Government of Sindh is responsible for the management and protection of the Historical Monuments at Makli, Thatta.  The site is staffed by a curator, archaeological conservator, technical assistant, supporting staff, and attendants. Funding comes from the Provincial Government of Sindh; this funding is recognised as inadequate.

Sustaining the Outstanding Universal Value of the property over time will require developing and implementing an emergency action plan to address urgent measures necessary for the security and the stabilisation of structures; completing, approving, and implementing the Comprehensive Master Plan and a Management Plan for the property; defining the precise boundaries of the property and the buffer zone; preparing a condition report for all monuments and tombs; taking appropriate measures to stabilise the tomb of Jam Nizamuddin II; and implementing an overall monitoring programme.

Links
Welcome to Pakistan

Thatta (Pakistan Travel web)

Activities 1
World Heritage, Sustainable Development and Community Involvement
News  4
UNESCO Strengthens Capacity of the Government of Sindh in Preserving the Historical Monuments at Makli, Thatta in Pakistan
22 May 2025
UNESCO sends emergency missions to Moenjodaro and Makli, Pakistan
24 October 2022
Inter-Regional Workshop held in Pakistan: “World Heritage and Sustainable Development: The Role of Local Communities”
18 December 2017
Reactive Monitoring Mission to the Historical Monuments at Makli, Thatta World Heritage property (Pakistan)
19 February 2016
Events  1
Reactive Monitoring Mission to the Historical Monuments at Makli, Thatta World Heritage property (Pakistan)
19 Apr 2016 - 23 Apr 2016
Media
play_arrow Visit to Makli of the Final Workshop of the UNESCO/RoK FiT SDCI Project
Pakistan
Date of Inscription: 1981
Criteria: (iii)
Dossier: 143
Province of Sind
N24 46 0 E67 54 0
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2024 2023 2021 2019 2017 2016 2015 2013 2012 2011 2009 2007 2006
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026