World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Bardejov Town Conservation Reserve
Bardejov Town Conservation Reserve
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Assistance
Bardejov Town Conservation Reserve

Bardejov is a small but exceptionally complete and well-preserved example of a fortified medieval town, which typifies the urbanisation in this region. Among other remarkable features, it also contains a small Jewish quarter around a fine 18th-century synagogue.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The town of Bardejov is located in north-eastern Slovakia, on a floodplain terrace of the river Topľa near the Polish border. Due to its proximity to the major trade route that stretches across the Carpathian Mountains, from Hungary into Poland, Bardejov was able to develop into an important medieval town.

The town’s surviving urban plan, with a regular division of streets around a spacious market square, is an indication of European civilization from the 13th to 14th centuries. Burghers’ houses, dating from the first half of the 15th century, surround three sides of the square and document the highly developed burgess culture. The fourth side of the square is closed by the Roman Catholic Church of St. Giles, a three-naved Gothic basilica with a precious collection of eleven late Gothic altars. The Renaissance town hall occupies the centre of the square. The historic core of the town is encircled by the fortification system which was, at the time of its construction, one of the most advanced in Central Europe. The area of the town’s historic core was declared a Town Conservation Reserve in 1950. Bardejov also has a well-preserved small Jewish suburb. This quarter, developed over the 18th century around a synagogue (1725-1747), still contains a unique set of surviving buildings from that era: a kosher slaughter house, some ritual baths, and a meeting building (Beth Hamidrash).

Bardejov provides exceptionally well-preserved evidence of the economic and social structure of trading towns in medieval Central Europe. Its surviving building stock represents a developed burgess culture and Jewish community, thus illustrating a multi-national and multi-cultural society.   

Criterion (iii): The fortified town of Bardejov provides exceptionally well-preserved evidence of the economic and social structure of trading towns in medieval Central Europe.

Criterion (iv): The plan, buildings and fortifications of Bardejov illustrate the urban complex that developed in Central Europe in the Middle Ages along the great trade routes of the period. 

Integrity

The delimitation and size of the property are appropriate and all the important elements necessary to convey the Outstanding Universal Value of the property are contained within its boundaries. The historic town core has retained the key characteristic attributes of a medieval trade town especially with regards to its urban plan, its original building lot divisions (parcels), its central square, its streets, most of its open spaces, public buildings, fortifications, and its townscape. Outside the fortifications, the Jewish suburb survives relatively intact with its original layout and component parts such as the synagogue, baths, and slaughter house.

The town-planning structures of the property are stabilized but there is, as in all living towns, a risk of development pressures, especially in the buffer zone. 

Authenticity

Bardejov Town Conservation Reserve has preserved a high level of authenticity. Despite several major fires, mainly in the 16th and 17th centuries, its medieval urban form has been retained. Moreover, the housing stock has survived with no major demolitions or additions. The dynamics of the town’s roof landscape, destroyed in the last fire, has been restored by the systematic reconstructions which begun after 1967. Although some buildings have undergone alterations, most have retained their authentic interiors. Traditional uses for burghers’ houses have also been retained or restored with business and service functions combined with residential use on the upper floors. The buildings, with their original materials, openings, decorations, and fittings, are well preserved. The Jewish suburb has also retained high authenticity, as reflected in its early 18th century road network, urban plots, buildings and open spaces. Parts of the fortifications have been demolished or, in the case of the moat, filled in. However, more than half of the fortifications are still intact and well maintained, and some of the towers are still in use.

A special value of the property lies in its present-day vitality and contemporary activities which do not compromise the historic substance, yet it needs to face the challenge of finding an appropriate use for the Jewish suburb as the town’s Jewish population has diminished. 

Protection and management requirements

The 24-ha property has the highest form of monument protection enabled by the national legislation. The Slovak Republic has adopted the special Act No. 176/2002 Coll. on the protection and development of the town of Bardejov that refers to the whole property. The Ministry of Culture and the Monuments Board of the Slovak Republic have the overall responsibility for the property’s protection.

The property‘s protection is legislatively secured by the provisions of the Act No. 49/2002 Coll. on the protection of monuments and historic sites that refers to the protection of all cultural monuments and protected areas within the World Heritage property. In the sense of this act, the historic core of the town has been declared a town conservation reserve and most of the buildings, in both the historic centre and the Jewish suburb, are protected as national cultural monuments. The property’s protection is strengthened by the declared buffer zone of the town conservation reserve that covers 13 ha and corresponds with the World Heritage buffer zone.

Property ownership includes a variety of religious institutions (such as Catholic, Protestant and Greek-Orthodox churches and the Central Union of the Jewish Religious Communities in Slovakia), government (municipal and State), and private individuals.

A regular system of monitoring has been established according to which the Outstanding Universal Value of the property is assessed and monitored, whilst measures for avoiding identified threats are taken.

All planned activities within the property must comply with the legally binding Principles of Conservation of Bardejov Town Conservation Reserve (2009) and are liable to strict assessment of the project documentation by the regional monuments office. The Principles of Conservation are respected by the provisions of the urban planning documentation as well as by the property’s management plan. The management system is updated in order to create an efficient and coherent system of the property management. Bardejov Town Council conducts the property management in close cooperation with the local representative of the respective national authority, Regional Monuments Board Prešov.

Links
Bardejov

Activities 1
World Heritage Cities Programme
News  1
World Heritage Committee Inscribes 61 New Sites on World Heritage List
30 November 2000
Media
play_arrow Bardejov Town Conservation Reserve (UNESCO/NHK)
Slovakia
Date of Inscription: 2000
Criteria: (iii)(iv)
Property : 23.6 ha

Buffer zone: 12.83 ha
Dossier: 973
Town and District of Bardejov, Prešov Region
N49 17 34 E21 16 32
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026