World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Petroglyphs of Lake Onega and the White Sea
Petroglyphs of Lake Onega and the White Sea
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Petroglyphs of Lake Onega and the White Sea

The site contains 4,500 petroglyphs carved in the rocks during the Neolithic period dated about 6-7 thousand years ago and located in the Republic of Karelia in the Russian Federation. It is one of the largest such sites in Europe with petroglyphs that document Neolithic culture in Fennoscandia. The serial property encompasses 33 rock art panels in two component parts 300km apart: 22 petroglyph groups at Lake Onega in the District of Pudozhsky featuring a total of over 1,200 figures and 3,411 figures in 11 groups by the White Sea in the District of Belomorsky. The rock art figures at Lake Onega mostly represents birds, animals, half human and half animal figures as well as geometric shapes that may be symbols of the moon and the sun. The petroglyphs of the White Sea are mostly composed of carvings depicting hunting and sailing scenes including their related equipment as well as animal and human footprints. They show significant artistic qualities and testify to the creativity of the Stone Age. The petroglyphs are associated with sites including settlements and burial grounds.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The Petroglyphs of Lake Onega and the White Sea are situated in the north-west of Russia in the Republic of Karelia and contain two component parts located 300 km from each other. The petroglyphs of Lake Onega are in the south-eastern part of the Republic of Karelia and those of the White Sea are in the north-eastern part.

The petroglyphs of Lake Onega and the White Sea represent one of the largest independent centres of Neolithic rock art in Europe, dating to between circa 4,500 BCE to 3,500 BCE. The property comprises a total of over 4,500 petroglyphs concentrated in 33 sites within two component parts, including a total of 22 sites at Lake Onega and 11 located at the White Sea. The petroglyphs are also associated with more than 100 archaeological sites including settlements, camp sites and one burial ground dated as contemporary with the rock art.

The rock art at Lake Onega represents animals (birds, forest animals), humans and anthropomorphs interpreted as demons, as well as geometric (solar and lunar) signs while the petroglyphs of the White Sea are mostly composed of carvings like depicted boats, sea and forest hunting scenes including their related equipment as well as animal and human footprints.

The emergence of the petroglyphs dates back to the Neolithic era — along with associated archaeological sites, including settlements and burial ground, witnessing the culture of hunter-fisher-gatherers in the North of Europe. The petroglyphs attest to the beliefs and lifestyle of the hunter-fisher-gatherers over a period of 600-800 years, speak of the advanced development of this culture that used these rock art centres as meeting places and show significant artistic qualities and creativity of the Stone Age artists.

There are clear similarities between the rock art of Lake Onega and the White Sea especially in the rock carving technique, rock art compositions, in the scenes depicted and their style, as well as in the sites chosen for carving horizontal motifs on the rock panels. They were produced by the population of the same Neolithic culture; excavated archaeological material proves that part of the Pit-Comb Ware population of Lake Onega gradually migrated to the White Sea by water routes.

The Petroglyphs of Lake Onega and the White Sea contain representations of waterfowl including mainly realistic and fantastic swans that are unique in the rock art of Northern Fennoscandia and in Europe and were identified as one of the earliest illustrations of the rock carvings in the region.

Criterion (iii): The Petroglyphs of Lake Onega and the White Sea and the related archaeological sites are an exceptional testimony of the lifestyle and beliefs of the Pit-Comb Ware culture population in the Neolithic, providing a unique source of data and representing a coherent image of the Neolithic culture period in the northeastern part of Fennoscandia.

Integrity

Petroglyphs of Lake Onega and the White Sea include preserved representations of Neolithic rock art almost in their natural landscape. The component parts and their buffer zones are of an adequate size to guarantee a comprehensive illustration of the Outstanding Universal Value. Common or close themes in both components of the property demonstrate mutual influence as well as chronological closeness and complementarity in illustrating the northern Neolithic period in an exceptional manner. Cultural layers from the Mesolithic period up to Middle Ages are preserved in the vicinity of the petroglyphs.

The boundaries of the property have been established according to the legal framework in place in the Russian Federation and interdisciplinary research and include archaeological sites that contribute to the Outstanding Universal Value of the property.

The rock art carvings are well-preserved, and, at Lake Onega, their setting has survived almost untouched, which is crucial for the understanding and appreciation of the property. The buffer zones include archaeological heritage and sites associated with the rock art area within the property, which contribute to the understanding of the Outstanding Universal Value of the property.

Authenticity

The authenticity of the Petroglyphs of Lake Onega and the White Sea relies on the exceptional character of the petroglyphs testifying to the lifestyle and beliefs of the Neolithic cultures present in Northern Europe.

On one hand, Lake Onega landscape has neither been affected by major changes nor by human activities since the Neolithic period. The preserved surroundings of the rock art sites at Lake Onega facilitate an understanding of the prehistoric setting and context of the rock art, particularly its location at the lake shoreline, and the connection it makes with different elements of the landscape. On the other hand, the landscape of the rock carvings at the White Sea has been partly altered due to land uplift, the White Sea Canal, two hydroelectric stations, and connected dams.

Protection and management requirements

The first level of protection is the territory of the property (Federal Law No. 73-FZ and Regional Law No. ZRK-883): the Russian legislation establishes for each component part. Its territory ensures conservation of the property. Two types of actions are allowed: conservation of the property components and scientific research. Federal Law No. 73-FZ represents the main legal instrument governing the process of preservation of historical and cultural heritage in the Russian Federation. At the regional level, the Law of the Republic of Karelia dated 06.06.2005 (ZRK-883) regulates the conservation, development, promotion, and state protection of the cultural heritage sites of the peoples of the Russian Federation in the Republic of Karelia.

The second level of protection is the property protection zone (orders issued by the Chairman of the Government of the Republic of Karelia No. 518-r of 05.09.1996 and 163.03-r of 25.03.1998). These zones protect both rock art sites and all other associated archaeological sites as well as the surrounding landscape. The third level of protection is the regional protected area, i.e., the Muromsky Landscape Reserve. The final level of protection is applied to lands of historical and cultural value: all economic activities may be prohibited therein as well as on lands with the property and archaeological sites that are the subject of research and conservation, in accordance with the Land Code of the Russian Federation.

The boundaries of the protected zones at Lake Onega and the White Sea outlining the natural and cultural heritage related to the petroglyphs were delimited and approved in the 1990s. The additional protection is provided by establishing two sites of Federal Value for the components of the World Heritage property covering the property and buffer zone areas. The overall protection system is designed to ensure the effective protection of qualities of the surrounding landscape and of the archaeological sites located therein, which is essential for the long-term preservation of the authenticity and integrity of the property.

The Department for the Cultural Heritage Protection of the Republic of Karelia has established the State Rock Art Centre of the Republic of Karelia for the management of the property in the territories of the component parts.

The existence of a single authority for the management of petroglyphs of Lake Onega and the White Sea is crucial to ensure the coordinated management of two component parts of the property. The Rock Art Centre of the Republic of Karelia has been established in Petrozavodsk in order to preserve, study and popularize both components of the World Heritage property.

A conservation plan of the property and a program of integrated monitoring of rock art sites were developed by employees of this institution and academic scientists and approved by the Coordinating Council for the Management of the World Heritage Site that ensures the preservation and monitoring of the attributes of the property. The Coordinating Council and the Department of Cultural Heritage Protection of the Republic of Karelia are responsible for coordinating work with communities, the private sector, experts and scientists, federal, regional and local authorities.

News  1
World Heritage Committee inscribes four cultural and one natural site on UNESCO’s World Heritage List
28 July 2021
Russian Federation
Date of Inscription: 2021
Criteria: (iii)
Dossier: 1654
Serial: yes

Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2025 2023
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026