World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Venetian Works of Defence between the 16th ...
Venetian Works of Defence between the 16th and 17th Centuries: Stato da Terra – Western Stato da Mar
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Venetian Works of Defence between the 16th and 17th Centuries: Stato da Terra – Western Stato da Mar

This property consists of 6 components of defence works in Italy, Croatia and Montenegro, spanning more than 1,000 km between the Lombard region of Italy and the eastern Adriatic Coast. The fortifications throughout the Stato da Terra protected the Republic of Venice from other European powers to the northwest and those of the Stato da Mar protected the sea routes and ports in the Adriatic Sea to the Levant. They were necessary to support the expansion and authority of the Serenissima. The introduction of gunpowder led to significant shifts in military techniques and architecture that are reflected in the design of so-called alla moderna / bastioned, fortifications, which were to spread throughout Europe.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Spanish
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief Synthesis

The Venetian Works of Defence between the 16th and 17th centuries: Stato da Terra – western Stato da Mar consists of six components located in Italy, Croatia and Montenegro and spanning more than 1000 km between the Lombard region of Italy and the eastern Adriatic Coast. Together, they represent the defensive works of the Serenissima between the 16th and 17th centuries, the most significant period of the longer history of the Venetian Republic; and demonstrate the designs, adaptations and operations of alla moderna defences, which were to feature throughout Europe.

The introduction of gunpowder led to significant shifts in military techniques and architecture that are reflected in the design of fortifications – termed alla moderna. The organisation and defences of the Stato da Terra (protecting the Republic from other European powers to the northwest) and the Stato da Mar (protecting the sea routes and ports in the Adriatic Sea to the Levant) were needed to sustain the expansion and power of the Republic of Venice.

The expansive territory of the Serenessima was indisputably the near-exclusive setting of the genesis of the alla moderna or bastioned system during the Renaissance; and the extensive and innovative defensive networks established by the Republic of Venice are of exceptional historical, architectural and technological significance. The attributes of the Outstanding Universal Value include earthworks and structures of fortification and defence from the Venetian Republic in the 16th and 17th centuries. Strongly contributory to these are the landscape settings, and which strengthen the visual qualities of the six components, as well as urban and defensive structures from both earlier (Medieval) and more recent periods of history (such as the Napoleonic and Ottoman period modifications and additions) that allow the serial components to be truthfully presented and the tactical coherence of each military site in its final state to be recognised.

Criterion (iii): The Venetian Works of Defence provide an exceptional testimony of the alla moderna military culture, which evolved within the Republic of Venice in the 16th and 17th centuries, involving vast territories and interactions. Together the components demonstrate a defensive network or system for the Stato da Terra and the western Stato da Mar centred in the Adriatic Sea or Golfo di Venezia, which had civil, military, urban dimensions that extended further, traversing the Mediterranean region to the Levant.

Criterion (iv): The Venetian Works of Defence present the characteristics of the alla moderna fortified system (bastioned system) built by the Republic of Venice following changes that were introduced following the increased use of firearms. Together the six components demonstrate in an exceptional way the characteristics of the alla moderna system including its technical and logistic abilities, modern fighting strategies and new architectural requirements within the Stato da Terra and the western portions of the Stato da Mar.

Integrity

Together, the six components of Venetian Works of Defence within Stato da Terra and the western portions of the Stato da Mar exhibit the needed attributes of Outstanding Universal Value of this transnational heritage, including their typological variety, visual integrity and state of conservation. This serial property leaves open the potential for a future nomination of examples that can represent in an exceptional and complementary way, the applications of the alla moderna technologies through the extent of the Venetian Republic in this period of history in the eastern or Levante Stato da Mar. The state of conservation of the individual components is generally good, although their integrity is variable, and in some cases vulnerable, due to past and present development and tourism pressures. Although some further expansions could be made to the buffer zones (particularly for the components in Zadar and Kotor), the boundaries of the six components are appropriate.

Authenticity

The Venetian Works of Defence within Stato da Terra and the western portions of the Stato da Mar and the phenomenon of alla moderna military architecture have been extensively studied, supported by extensive archival materials, documents, architectural drawings, maps and models. Because of their purposes and locations, many changes have occurred to the selected components, including damage through different periods of conflict from the Napoleonic, Austrian and Ottoman periods and the 20th century.

Protection and management requirements

Legal protection of the components of the Venetian Works of Defence within the Stato da Terra and the western portions of the Stato da Mar has been established at national and regional/local levels in each of the three States Parties. The frameworks for legal protection include cultural heritage and environmental protection laws. In Italy, the three components are protected by the ‘Cultural and Landscape Heritage Code’ (2004) which establishes the national regulation framework for conservation works, including the protection of significant landscape elements; and each is further protected by regional and municipal Territorial Plans and local protection measures that regulate urban transformations. In Croatia, the two components are protected by the ‘Act on the Protection and Preservation of Cultural Property’, and inscription in the Register of Cultural properties; as well as local protection measures that regulate urban transformations. In Montenegro, the selected component is protected by the ‘Law on the Protection of Cultural Property’ and subordinate ordinances; and the ‘Law on Spatial Planning and Construction’ and local protection measures that regulate urban transformations.

Management of the transnational serial property is organised at transnational, national and local levels of responsibility and activity. A transnational Memorandum of Understanding (December 2015) provides coordination between the three States Parties and establishes the International Coordination Team responsible for coordination, implementation and regular updating of the Transnational Management Plan. Shared heritage management objectives, a framework for heritage impact assessment, and a summary of current projects are provided by the Transnational Management Plan. Risk Preparedness is established by the States Parties for the risks of relevant natural disasters, including earthquakes, forest fires and sea level rise. Due to the complex pressures and high levels of tourism at some of the components of this serial property, site-level Conservation and Management Plans are needed, including visitor management plans and tourism carrying capacity studies.

The International Coordination Team is supported by National Coordination Groups in each country, made up of relevant national and local authorities. The financial resources and the sources of expertise and training for the conservation of the components of this serial property have been outlined. An overarching system of monitoring has been established, but could be expanded by the work of the International Coordinating Team, particularly in relation to visitor pressures.

Links
priroda-skz.com

kanal-svetog-ante.com

Šibenik Tourist Board

Google Arts & Culture: Story Venetian Works of Defence

The Venetian Works of Defence between 16th and 17th centuries: Stato da Terra - Western Stato da Mar

News  2
State of Conservation of "Venetian Works of Defence between the 16th and 17th Centuries: Stato da Terra – Western Stato da Mar"
25 July 2018
Eight new sites inscribed on UNESCO’s World Heritage List
9 July 2017
Croatia
Italy
Montenegro
Date of Inscription: 2017
Criteria: (iii)(iv)
Property : 378.37 ha

Buffer zone: 1,749.62 ha
Dossier: 1533
Serial: yes

Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2025 2023 2021
Protections
by other conservation instruments

1 protection / 1 element

Biosphere Reserves (1 element)

Velebit Mountains

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026