World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Su Nuraxi di Barumini
Su Nuraxi di Barumini
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Su Nuraxi di Barumini

During the late 2nd millennium B.C. in the Bronze Age, a special type of defensive structure known as nuraghi (for which no parallel exists anywhere else in the world) developed on the island of Sardinia. The complex consists of circular defensive towers in the form of truncated cones built of dressed stone, with corbel-vaulted internal chambers. The complex at Barumini, which was extended and reinforced in the first half of the 1st millennium under Carthaginian pressure, is the finest and most complete example of this remarkable form of prehistoric architecture.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The archaeological site of Su Nuraxi di Barumini in Sardinia is the best-known example of the unique form of Bronze Age defensive complexes known as nuraghi. The elevated position of Su Nuraxi dominates a vast and fertile plain to the west of the municipal district of Barumini. The site was occupied from the time of construction of nuraghe in the 2nd millennium BCE until 3rd century CE.

Megalithic defensive structures known as nuraghi date from the Middle to Late Bronze Age (c. 1600-1200 BCE), and are unique to Sardinia. Nuraghi are characterised by circular defensive towers in the form of truncated cones built of dressed stone with corbel-vaulted internal chambers. Nuraghi are considered to have initially been built by single families or clans. As Sardinian society evolved in a more complex and hierarchical fashion, there was a tendency for the isolated towers to attract additional structures, for social and defensive reasons.

The Su Nuraxi nuraghe consisted of a massive central tower of three chambers connected by a spiral staircase, originally over 18.5 metres high. The uppermost chamber is no longer standing. The central tower was enclosed within a quadrilobate structure consisting of four subsidiary towers linked by a massive stone curtain wall. The courtyard created by this wall was later sealed with a roof thereby restricting access to the central tower. Surrounding this are the remains of second outer wall and a settlement of circular huts.

Su Nuraxi was abandoned in the 6th century BCE although intermittent occupation took place in subsequent centuries. New houses were constructed in a different form from their predecessors, consisting of several small rooms and constructed using small stones. Following the Roman conquest of Sardinia in the 2nd century BCE most nuraghi went out of use although excavations at Su Nuraxi indicate that people continued to live on the site until the 3rd century CE.

Criterion (i): The archaeological site of Su Nuraxi di Barumini is the pre-eminent and most complete example of the remarkable prehistoric architecture known as nuraghi.

Criterion (iii): The Su Nuraxi di Barumini bears exceptional testimony to the Bronze Age civilisation of Sardinia and evolution of the political and social conditions of this prehistoric island community over many centuries.

Criterion (iv): The property of Su Nuraxi di Barumini is the outstanding example of a nuraghe, unique megalithic defensive structures and associated settlements illustrative of the imaginative and innovative use of the materials and techniques that took place in the prehistoric island society of Sardinia in the middle-late Bronze Age.

Integrity

The property of the archaeological site complex of Su Nuraxi includes all elements of the complex necessary to demonstrate that Outstanding Universal Value of the property. These elements include the archaeological remains of the central defensive structures and surrounding village and all prehistoric village structures, the original planimetric layout of which is clearly retained.

Works for structural consolidation and conservative maintenance have been carried out in the area to improve the conditions of integrity of the archaeological structures. No works or modifications that may compromise the integrity of the site are foreseen.

A threat to the property is the main provincial road running along the northern boundary. Even if the road has thin traffic flows and has no direct impact on the ancient remains, it interferes with the perception of the archaeological landscape. The context and setting could be enhanced through re-routing of the road away from the property, but at the moment this solution is difficult to be realized due to financial reasons.

Authenticity

The property has a high level of authenticity. Although intermittently used until the 6th or 7th century CE, the nuragic structures appear to have been buried since then until archaeological excavations commenced in the 1950s. A systematic conservation campaign was undertaken in the early 1990s to stabilise and reinforce a number of structures. Subsequent restoration and consolidation works on the structures were undertaken in full compliance with the Restoration Charter, thus ensuring their conservation to the present day.

Interventions involving the use of modern materials such as reinforced concrete, metal, and wood are minimal and unobtrusive, and do not impact adversely on either the authenticity or the appearance of the archaeological remains.

Protection and management requirements

The property of Su Nuraxi di Barumini is surrounded by a buffer zone on the north, south-western and eastern side. The lack of a buffer zone over the open farmland to the south and west of the property was not seen as adequate for protection of the property. To further strengthen protection of the property, an institutional agreement has been signed between the municipalities bordering on Barumini’s archaeological site and the Ministry of Cultural Heritage and Activities and Tourism, the Regional authorities and the Provincial Administration of Cagliari which will facilitate the identification of a larger buffer zone that includes the overall areas of the aforementioned municipalities and create new forms of protection of the landscape surrounding the property.

As an archaeological site, Su Nuraxi complex is protected at the national level under Legislative Decree 42/2004, Code of Cultural and Landscape Heritage, a safeguarding measure that ensures activities on the site must be authorized by the relevant Superintendence (peripheral office of the Ministry for Cultural Heritage and Activities and Tourism). This framework of legal protection is considered sufficiently effective. On a regional level, the site has been included in a heritage list protected under the Regional Landscape Plan of Sardinia. A further procedure to protect also the surrounding territory has been undertaken by the Superintendence. The local municipal town-planning scheme has placed an absolute ban on any building construction in the buffer zone. This building restriction is further backed by means of a preventive band of protection, encircling the property ensures that no unsuitable development can occur within the environs of the World Heritage property.

Management of the archaeological site is the responsibility of the Ministry for Cultural Heritage and Activities and Tourism. Site management is the subject of an agreement between the two entities primarily concerned, namely the Cultural Heritage Office and the Municipality of Barumini. Under this agreement, the running of the property falls within the responsibility of the Municipality, which is then implemented under contract with a managing company (Fondazione Barumini Sistema Cultura), thus ensuring on-going, constant activity within the UNESCO World Heritage property.

Superintendence for the Archaeological Heritage of Sardinia regularly checks the conservation of the integrity and authenticity of the property, also with three people serving regularly there. The Superintendence performs periodic maintenance although no formal monitoring program is in place.

The Region of Sardinia and the Municipality of Barumini are the authorities responsible for the management of tourism at the property. High tourist numbers pose potential threats to the integrity and conservation of property. To minimize the impact of the tourists the visit of the archaeological site is permitted only in small groups with a tour leader and developing a cultural tourism strategy for the whole region. Local authorities are trying to rationalize the number of visits in high season, offering of incentives for tourists to visit in low season and developing a cultural tourism strategy for the whole region. Public transport connections to access the property are poor.

Links
Archaeological zone of Su Nuraxi

Barumini Foundation

News  1
World Heritage Committee Inscribes 46 New Sites on World Heritage List
7 December 1997
Italy
Date of Inscription: 1997
Criteria: (i)(iii)(iv)
Property : 2.3254 ha

Buffer zone: 3.9178 ha
Dossier: 833
Province of Medio Campidano, Sardinia
N39 42 21 E8 59 29
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
Protections
by other conservation instruments

1 protection / 1 element

2003 Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage (1 element)

Canto a tenore, Sardinian pastoral songs

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026