World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Archaeological Site of Leptis Magna
Archaeological Site of Leptis Magna
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Assistance
Archaeological Site of Leptis Magna

Leptis Magna was enlarged and embellished by Septimius Severus, who was born there and later became emperor. It was one of the most beautiful cities of the Roman Empire, with its imposing public monuments, harbour, market-place, storehouses, shops and residential districts.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The ancient city of Leptis Magna was founded as a temporary trading port by the Phoenicians in the 7th century BCE and expanded under the Roman Empire. It was significantly embellished by the Severan emperors in the 3rd century CE, transforming it into one of the most splendid cities of Roman North Africa. The surviving and excavated remains of the city reflect a unique artistic realisation in the domain of urban planning and in its application of monumental display. The city demonstrates a high level of engineering skill achieved in the creation of its infrastructure with the antique port of the city, situated at the mouth of Wadi Lebda. The port with its artificial basin, barrage and canal designed to regulate the course of the Wadi Lebda, is one of the outstanding works of Roman technology.

The city of Leptis Magna provides a vivid and full picture of life in a Roman provincial city during the early and middle periods of the Roman Empire, with some buildings deviating considerably in their organization or shape from those seen at other Roman sites. Not only have remains of prestigious monuments such as arches, gates, the Severan forum, temples, baths, theatre, fortifications and amphitheatre survived, but also evidence for the essential of everyday life such as the market, with its votive arch and colonnade of shops, as well as warehouse and ateliers that attest to commercial and industrial activity.

In the 17th and 18th centuries CE, the ruins of Leptis Magna were rediscovered by travellers and came to play a major role in the elaboration of the Neo-classical aesthetic.

Criterion (i): Leptis Magna is a unique artistic realisation in the domain of urban planning and in its application of monumental display. The urban fabric of the city represents a synthesis of progressive developments and enlargements which came to a height in the Severan period, incorporating major monumental elements of that period worthy of an imperial capital. The Severan forum, the basilica and the Severan arch rank among the finest monuments known from the Roman world and were strongly influenced by African and Eastern traditions. The sculpture and carvings, including that of the Severan basilica and the Severan arch are innovative in their linear definition of forms, the crispness of their contours and the angular delineation of their volumes. The port of Leptis is one of the outstanding works of Roman technology.

Criterion (ii): The large number of sculptures and statues found in Leptis demonstrate clearly Punic, Roman, Greek and Hellenistic influences. Aegean craftsmanship can be seen in the magnificent marble decorations on the pillars in the Severan Basilica and those on the Arch of Severus. Leptis, which was rediscovered in the 17th and 18th centuries by travellers such as Durand and Lemaire, has played a major role in the movement back to Antiquity and in the elaboration of the Neo-classic aesthetic.

Criterion (iii): The number and the variety of the structures of Leptis Magna bear witness to a vanished civilization. The site provides a full picture of life in a large provincial city through the urban, architectural and decorative aspects that have been preserved. The monuments furnish a vivid impression of the lifestyle enjoyed in the city during the early and middle periods of the Roman Empire. The city still maintains the most important elements of its antique port, including vestiges of the former warehouses and the outline of its artificial basin of nearly 102,000 m2 still discernible. The market, an essential element in the everyday life of a large commercial trading centre, with its votive arch, its colonnades and its shops, has been, for the most part, preserved. The prestigious monuments, arches, gates, old forum, Severan forum, temples, baths, theatre, circus and amphitheatre all attest to the commercial, industrial, and civic activity of the city.

Integrity

The architectural heritage of Leptis Magna is very extensive and most of its principal elements are largely intact. The urban area (ca. 400 ha) offers an authentic glimpse of a great provincial city. The monuments and archaeological finds of the ancient city represent all the attributes expressed in the Outstanding Universal Value within its designated area.

Authenticity

Leptis Magna has maintained a high level of authenticity, and the city has deservedly earned a reputation of having the most complete and impressive Roman ruins in the entirety of North Africa. It is largely due to a cover of wind-blown sand from the interior that Leptis Magna is so well preserved and entirely protected for 800 years.

The authenticity of the individual components and the ancient urban fabric as a whole is very high. The structures brought to light by excavations carried out in the first half of the twentieth century have been the object of consolidation, restoration and maintenance operations and, to a lesser extent, reconstruction in full respect of the original morphology of the elements involved.

Protection and management requirements

At the time of inscription, the city including all of its individual monuments and archaeological sites, was legally protected and assured by the authority of the Department of Antiquities (DoA) and the local community of Lebda through the provisions of Law No. 40/1968 governing the administration of antiquities. This was later replaced by Law No. 3/1994 and its Executive regulations/1995 issued by the General People’s Congress. Leptis Magna, at the time of inscription was managed by the superintendent of Lebda region/municipality. Since 2019 the DoA has established a local office overseeing the management and protection of the property as well as the museums which hold a significant collection of excavated material, including mosaics and frescoes.

Effective protection is guaranteed through collaboration between the local authority, the development partners and the Department of Antiquities, the Urban Planning Department, local City Council, civil society associations and the Tourist and Antiquities Police. The law cited has, so far, guaranteed the preservation of the entire area of the property which, in relation to its principal areas, has not been compromised or suffered the effects of illegal building activity. Vegetal encroachment is a factor that needs constant monitoring and intervention. A buffer zone that will limit urban development in the vicinity of the site of Leptis Magna and ensure that the neighbouring area is also conserved has been outlined and is under preparation.

Links
Leptis Magna Excavation Site's website page

Publications
Ennabli, Abdelmajid. "North Africa's Roman art. Its future" in North Africa's Roman art. Its future , September 2000, pp 18-29
News  8
Continued technical support for the elaboration of the Desired State of Conservation for properties in Libya
25 June 2021
Polish city of Kraków to host 2017 World Heritage Committee session
17 July 2016
Libya’s five World Heritage sites put on List of World Heritage in Danger
14 July 2016
Key Libyan and international partners unite to adopt an action plan for Libya’s heritage
13 May 2016
More add
Events  2
Online technical meeting for Libyan properties on the List of World Heritage in Danger
25 Nov 2020 - 25 Nov 2020
Bikeabout To Launch Circum-Mediterranean Tour Of World Heritage Sites
24 Sep 1997 - 30 Jun 1998
Media
play_arrow Archaeological Site of Leptis Magna (UNESCO/NHK)
play_arrow Archaeological Site of Leptis Magna (UNESCO/NHK)
Libya
Date of Inscription: 1982
Criteria: (i)(ii)(iii)
Property : 387.485 ha

Dossier: 183
District of Khoms
N32 38 17.988 E14 17 35.016
List of World Heritage in Danger

Inscription Year on the List of World Heritage in Danger

2016 - Present
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2025 2024 2023 2021 2019 2018 2017 1990
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026