World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Historic Fortified City of Carcassonne
Historic Fortified City of Carcassonne
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Historic Fortified City of Carcassonne

Since the pre-Roman period, a fortified settlement has existed on the hill where Carcassonne now stands. In its present form it is an outstanding example of a medieval fortified town, with its massive defences encircling the castle and the surrounding buildings, its streets and its fine Gothic cathedral. Carcassonne is also of exceptional importance because of the lengthy restoration campaign undertaken by Viollet-le-Duc, one of the founders of the modern science of conservation.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The city of Carcassonne is located in the Occitanie region, in the department of Aude, on a rocky outcrop dominating the course of the Aude and on the historic axis of communication linking the Atlantic to the Mediterranean. Since the pre-Roman period, fortifications have been erected on the hill where Carcassonne is located today. In its present form, it is an outstanding example of a fortified medieval city with an enormous defensive system developed mainly in the 13th century. This system consists of two enclosures separated by barriers surrounding the houses, the streets and the superb Gothic cathedral, as well as the castle and the main buildings associated with it.

The inner ramparts comprise twenty-six circular towers and largely overlap the clearly visible Roman defenses for two-thirds of their length. The outer ramparts have nineteen round towers, three of which are barbicans. The enclosure is surrounded by moats and the two main entrances to the fortified city, the Porte Narbonnaise and the Porte de l'Aude, are particularly elaborate. The 12th century count's castle and the main buildings associated with it were built on the western part of the Roman ramparts. The basilica dedicated to Saints Nazaire and Celse has no flying buttresses, stability being ensured by the internal vaulted structure.

Carcassonne also owes its exceptional importance to the long restoration campaign led from 1853 to 1879 by Eugène Viollet-le-Duc, one of the founders of modern conservation science.

Criterion (ii): The fortified city of Carcassonne owes its exceptional importance to the restoration work undertaken during the second half of the 19th century by Viollet-le-Duc, who strongly influenced the evolution of conservation principles and practices.

Criterion (iv): The city of Carcassonne is an excellent example of a fortified medieval city whose enormous defensive system was built on ramparts dating from late antiquity.

Integrity

The fortifications of Carcassonne, as well as the castle and the cathedral, are imposing monuments which reflect in an exceptionally complete way the structure of a medieval fortified city. Their integrity is genuine for the fortifications (only the great barbican is missing from the defensive system), a little less for the urban buildings (disappearance of Saint-Sernin Church and the cloister of the Cathedral). The Cathedral is an integral part of the feudal and then royal design of this great medieval fortress. Paradoxically, it was the integrity of Viollet-le-Duc's intervention on the double enclosure that suffered attacks in the 20th century, through the arbitrary substitution of covering materials, before the quality of his work was recognized.  

Authenticity

While authenticity as a medieval monument cannot be maintained due to 19th century restorations, which mainly concerned crowning and roofing, most of the ramparts and towers are authentic, with substantial elements of the ramparts of the Late Roman Empire. Saint-Nazaire Cathedral, with its sculpted decoration and its remarkable set of 14th century stained glass windows, presents the appearance it had in the Middle Ages.

Protection and management requirements

The enclosure and the cathedral of Carcassonne are protected in application of the Heritage Code and belong to the State. They have been classified as historical monuments since 1840. Other intramural buildings are also protected.

The buffer zone is constituted by protection under classified and registered sites.

The management and conservation of the double enclosure are entrusted to the Centre des Monuments Nationaux, a public establishment under the supervision of the Ministry of Culture, which finances and implements the necessary conservation work and ensures that it is open to the public.

The Cité and its surroundings are governed by public utility and town planning easements which control its development, the management of which is the responsibility of the city of Carcassonne in collaboration with the State services, which constitutes the heart of the management system of the property.

To be effective, the management of the property requires stable inter-institutional dialogue, coordination and collaboration, for which a property committee is being set up, with the mandate to develop and implement a management plan. The landscape quality of the immediate and wider environment of the property is crucial for safeguarding its Outstanding Universal Value, hence the ongoing implementation of a major site operation. Its objective will be to improve the landscape quality of the surroundings of the city and to channel the reception of visitors, by eliminating parking in the immediate surroundings of the inscribed property.

Links
Tourism office of Carcassonne

 View photos from OUR PLACE the World Heritage collection

carcassonne.monuments-nationaux.fr

Official website of the City of Carcassone

Activities 1
World Heritage Cities Programme
News  1
World Heritage Committee Inscribes 46 New Sites on World Heritage List
7 December 1997
Media
play_arrow Historic Fortified City of Carcassonne (UNESCO/NHK)
France
Date of Inscription: 1997
Criteria: (ii)(iv)
Property : 11 ha

Buffer zone: 1,358 ha
Dossier: 345rev
Department of Aude, Languedoc-Roussillon Region
N43 12 25.427 E2 21 49.162
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

Protections
by other conservation instruments

1 protection / 1 element

2003 Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage (1 element)

Scribing tradition in French timber framing

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026