World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Hatra
Hatra
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Assistance
Hatra

A large fortified city under the influence of the Parthian Empire and capital of the first Arab Kingdom, Hatra withstood invasions by the Romans in A.D. 116 and 198 thanks to its high, thick walls reinforced by towers. The remains of the city, especially the temples where Hellenistic and Roman architecture blend with Eastern decorative features, attest to the greatness of its civilization.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

An ancient, fortified city founded on the ruins of an Assyrian settlement, Hatra is located in northern Iraq, between the Tigris and Euphrates, in an open semi-desert, 110 km southwest of Mosul, and about 70 km west of the capital, Ashur, 3 km to the west of Wadi al-Tharthar. Its name, possibly of Aramaic or Arabic origin, probably referred to “enclosure”. Its location, along the military and trade routes that linked the Roman Empire in the west and the Parthian Empire in the east and bordering the Tigris and Euphrates which linked Mesopotamia to the Arabian Gulf, favoured the development of Hatra as an important religious and commercial centre. The religious factor was one of the main reasons for the development of the city from a small village in the first century BC to a large kingdom in the middle of the second century AD. It is the best-preserved city of the Parthian empire (ca. 200 BC-220 AD).

Adapted to the topographic features of the site, Hatra presents a remarkable urban complex of circular design. The city's defences of double walls are in perfect condition and lie in an untouched desert steppe environment. The external wall is an earthen bank with a circumference of 9 km; the inner main wall, about 2 km in diameter, is built of stone and strengthened by 171 large and small towers, and a number of strongholds; a ditch ranging between 4-5 m in depth and about 8-14 m in width was dug adjacent to its external side; the inner wall has four fortified gates which roughly correspond with the four cardinal points.

The fortifications successfully defended the city against the Roman armies led by Trajan in 116 CE, and by Septimius Severus in 198 CE, with the city becoming celebrated for its impregnability.

In the centre of the city is the huge rectangular temenos, east-west oriented, surrounded by a wall and divided by a further wall into two unequal spaces, identified as a large and small courtyard and sanctuary. The main sanctuaries are located in the small courtyard. Hatra was the centre of religious, social and economic activity for all the inhabitants of the Jazeera of Iraq. Inside the temenos are seven temples and shrines, each of which is dedicated to a specific deity, and all have Iwans, open halls with high barrel-vaulted roofs that were a Parthian innovation. At the back of the small courtyard, a row of eight contiguous and consistent Iwans facing the eastward direction forms a facade of 115 m long and 23 m wide:  this structure is known as the ‘Great Temple’; rooms looking onto a pilastered portico have been found on each of the four sides of the rectangular enclosure.

The people of Hatra relied on wells as water sources, and managed the lake within Hatra’s walls; therefore, despite limitation of water sources, they were able to make skilful use of water and were self-sustainable. They also built bridges on Wadi al-Tharthar River and wells near the city, outside the current boundaries of the property. Remains of these structures still survive in the surroundings of Hatra.

Hatra has a distinctive architecture reflecting different styles and influences and different building techniques - mudbrick, brick, bitumen and gypsum, stone and gypsum, as the city relied for its building materials on the stone quarries near the site. The design of the great Iwans of the Hatra temenos exerted lasting influence over the architecture in the region until the Islamic age.

Archaeological investigations have yielded hundreds of stone statues and statuettes, some of which portray gods or members of the ruling dynasty, as well as other sculptured figures, in a sort of post-Hellenistic art style that is distinctive to Hatra; some of these sculptures bear Aramaic inscriptions. Part of these findings and artworks are displayed in the local museum which is housed in the rooms of the temenos/Great Temple. Other sculptures are on display in various museums in Iraq.

The monuments, art and inscriptions of Hatra offer exceptional evidence of a facet of the Assyro-Babylonian civilization that developed in Hatra under the influence of Greek, Parthian and Roman civilizations. As an excellent example of a fortified city, with its double wall perfectly preserved, it stands out among a series of fortified cities that covers the Parthian, the Sassanid and ancient Islamic civilisations.

Criterion (ii): The great Iwans of the Hatra temenos, remarkable for the perfection of their vaulted chambers, and the fourteen small temples scattered outside the sacred enclosure, have exerted lasting influence over the region's architecture up until the Islamic age.

Criterion (iii): By virtue of its monuments and inscriptions, Hatra offers exceptional testimony to an entire facet of Assyro­Babylonian civilization subjected to the influence of Greeks, Parthians, Romans and Arabs. It is the best-preserved city of the Parthian empire (ca. 200 BC-220 AD).

Criterion (iv): Hatra is an excellent example of fortified cities along the circular plan of the East, such as Ctesiphon, Firouzabad or Zingirli. The perfect condition of the double wall in an untouched environment sets it aside as an outstanding example of a series which covers the Parthian, Sassanid and ancient Islamic civilizations.

Criterion (vi): The city success against Roman forces, led to it being considered an outstanding symbol of Parthian power.

Integrity

Hatra includes all of the attributes supporting its Outstanding Universal Value within the perimeter of its outer walls. Hatra’s immediate and wider setting - a semi-desert landscape that surrounds the walled city almost on all sides where several archaeological remains of bridges roads, wells and other infrastructure survive - significantly contributes to the understanding and appreciation of the importance of the city and of the once imposing fortifications: this archaeological landscape needs safeguarding and protection.

Most of the buildings in Hatra were found during the excavations in a ruined condition, while some buildings have preserved components, such as many rooms of the temenos, which have been used as a local museum. In the past, conservation and restoration works have played a major role in restoring those walls and buildings to their original condition.

Hatra has been impacted by previous conflicts, resulting in localized damage, including at some of the architectural decoration that have more recently suffered by the damage inflicted during 2015-2017. However, Hatra’s architectural monuments are mostly in a relatively good condition, although the site has suffered from neglect and looting and it is subject to severe weathering, therefore its integrity remains vulnerable.

Authenticity

The location and topography of the site where Hatra stands, at the crossroad of important communication routes, in a still untouched environment, still convey the sense of its power and its importance as a military and commercial outpost.

The circular layout of the fortified city and its unique town planning, with its fortifications, walls, fortified entrances, trenches and its defensive towers, designed to be harnessed in conjunction with the advanced war technology developed at Hatra, explain the reasons why the city withstood repeated sieges. The preserved urban form and articulation demonstrate that Hatra is an excellent example of the fortified eastern cities. The well-preserved double city wall outstandingly demonstrates Hatra’s power to harness the circumstances of history and provides exceptional testimony to an entire facet of Assyro-Babylonian civilization, subject to the influence of Aramean, Greeks, Parthians, Romans and Arabs. The rectangular temenos with its temples, in the centre of Hatra, still conveys the religious importance of the city and the sense of its special sanctity in ancient times. The design and the built fabric of its Iwans and of its architecture reflect the Assyrian and Babylonian construction culture and the contribution of Hellenistic and Roman influences which have resulted in a distinctive architecture and construction know-how, through building methods, materials, design and decoration, particularly the use of carved stone and gypsum. The barrel vaults of Hatra's large rectangular Iwans represent an innovation in construction, suggesting technical revolution at that time. A wealth of statues, statuettes, inscriptions and builder’s tokens represent key sources of information and historical evidence on the distinctive advanced Hatrene culture and complement the attributes of Hatra in illustrating its Outstanding Universal Value.

The archaeological authorities have undertaken works on a number of buildings, using the same stone quarries that were used by the Hatrene with involvement of specialized archaeologists, and the stone chiseller who cut and sculpted the stone according to the standard characteristics. Stone chisellers were famous in Mosul. Careful archaeological conservation work is needed to preserve the authentic fabric discovered through excavations, with the involvement of specialized archaeologists and skilled artisans.

Protection and management requirements

The main legislation for heritage protection at the time of the inscription of Hatra on the World Heritage List was Law No.59 of 1936. Several years following the inscription, Iraq adopted Law No.55 2002, which is currently enforced. There is no specific article on the protection of Hatra, however, Law No.55 2002 provided protection for all archaeological sites in Iraq, including Hatra.

The State Board of Antiquities and Heritage (SBAH) is the authority responsible for the management of World Heritage Sites. The International Organizations Department is responsible for the implementation of the 1972 Convention, represented on the ground by the World Heritage site managers, while the Directorate General of Investigations and Excavations is responsible for all activities at archaeological sites. All activities can only be implemented with the approval of the Head of the SBAH. The authority of SBAH is indicated clearly within Law No.55 2002 as written consent is required for any activities, developments, and alterations at recognized archaeological sites. 

Hatra needs continuous care and maintenance to address the natural deterioration and damage arising from relative neglect and lack of maintenance during recent armed conflict. Time, financial resources, protection mechanisms and a strategy that involves a balance between archaeological works and conservation measures to protect and preserve all attributes of the property, as well as its immediate and wider setting, are all required.

Plans for archaeological conservation work exist, especially for buildings that were eroded as a result of natural factors. An employee of the archaeological authorities who is known as the resident of the site accompanies visitors for guidance and interpretation.

A clear management system, adequate staffing levels at the site level, and a management plan, including archaeological and conservation plans, visitor and awareness-raising strategies and related operational plans, are crucial to guarantee the long-term protection of Hatra’s attributes that support its Outstanding Universal Value.

Activities 2
World Heritage Earthen Architecture Programme (WHEAP)
Creating a digital archive of historic documents and photographs of World Heritage sites in Iraq
News  17
UNESCO Director-General welcomes the liberation of Hatra and will send Emergency Assessment mission “as soon as possible”
28 April 2017
UNESCO calls on international community to help revive Iraq’s cultural heritage in the wake of massive destruction
24 February 2017
World Heritage Committee announces 2016 meeting in Istanbul, 24 new sites inscribed in Bonn
8 July 2015
The Iraqi site of Hatra added to the List of World Heritage in Danger
1 July 2015
More add
Media
play_arrow Hatra (UNESCO/NHK)
Iraq
Date of Inscription: 1985
Criteria: (ii)(iii)(iv)(vi)
Property : 626 ha

Dossier: 277rev
Governorate of Ninawa
N35 35 17.02 E42 43 5.99
List of World Heritage in Danger

Inscription Year on the List of World Heritage in Danger

2015 - Present
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2025 2024 2023 2021 2019 2018 2017 2016 2015 2001 1995
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026