World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Longobards in Italy. Places of the Power ...
Longobards in Italy. Places of the Power (568-774 A.D.)
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Longobards in Italy. Places of the Power (568-774 A.D.)

The Longobards in Italy, Places of Power, 568 - 774 A.D. comprises seven groups of important buildings (including fortresses, churches, and monasteries) throughout the Italian Peninsula. They testify to the high achievement of the Lombards, who migrated from northern Europe and developed their own specific culture in Italy where they ruled over vast territories in the 6th to 8th centuries. The Lombards synthesis of architectural styles marked the transition from Antiquity to the European Middle Ages, drawing on the heritage of Ancient Rome, Christian spirituality, Byzantine influence and Germanic northern Europe. The serial property testifies to the Lombards' major role in the spiritual and cultural development of Medieval European Christianity, notably by bolstering the monastic movement.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The serial property represents the quintessence of the remaining built and artistic heritage of the Lombards in Italy today. A people of Germanic origin, having settled and converted to Christianity, the Lombards assimilated the material and cultural values inherited from the end of the Roman world. Also in contact with Byzantine, Hellenistic and Middle Eastern influences, the Lombards achieved a cultural, architectural and artistic synthesis, unique in terms of its monumental and stylistic diversity and the various secular and religious uses. It is one of the main roots of the beginnings of the medieval European world and the establishment of Western Christianity.

Criterion (ii): The Lombard monuments are an exemplary testimony to the cultural and artistic synthesis that occurred in Italy in the 6th to the 8th centuries, between the Roman heritage, Christian spirituality, Byzantine influence and the values derived from the Germanic world. They paved the way for and heralded the flowering of Carolingian culture and artistry.

Criterion (iii): The Lombard places of the power express remarkable new artistic and monumental forms, testifying to a Lombard culture characteristic of the European High Middle Ages. It takes the form of a clearly identifiable and unique cultural ensemble, the many languages and objectives of which express the power of the Lombard elite.

Criterion (vi): The place of the Lombards and their heritage in the spiritual and cultural structures of medieval European Christianity is very important. They considerably reinforced the monastic movement and contributed to the establishment of a forerunner venue for the great pilgrimages, in Monte Sant'Angelo, with the spread of the worship of St Michael. They also played an important role in the transmission of literary, technical, architectural, scientific, historical and legal works from Antiquity to the nascent European world.

Integrity

The sites meet the conditions of integrity, in particular as regards the serial justification. The application of rigorous selection criteria has led to the exclusion of the ancient Lombard royal capitals and the imposition of strict boundaries. Nonetheless, the sites include all the elements required to express the series' Outstanding Universal Value, notably through the adequate state of conservation of its components.

Authenticity

The conditions of authenticity of the monumental, decorative and epigraphic elements presented are adequate. They are accompanied by detailed architectural, artistic, archaeological and historical documentation that justifies both their selection and their authenticity.

Protection and management requirements

All the nominated sites benefit from the highest level of legal protection, established by the Legislative Decree No 42 of 22 January 2004 (Codice dei beni culturali e del paesaggio).  It is a complex property with many of its important components being intrinsically fragile and delicate to conserve, such as the archaeological remains, paintings and stucco. Nonetheless, adequate conservation measures are implemented by the State Party.

There is a specific management system for each of the seven properties, in relation to their ownership, comprising many and varied stakeholders. The Italia Langobardorum association network has become an overarching authority able to harmonise and monitor the series. The Management Plan includes a very comprehensive range of projects. Nonetheless, they need to be prioritised in terms of the lasting conservation of the properties and the environmental expression of their outstanding value. In addition to the natural seismic and river erosion risks present at certain sites, tourism development pressure could threaten those components of the property most susceptible to human presence.

Links
Longobardi in Italia (in Italian)

News  1
World Heritage Committee inscribes five new sites in Colombia, Sudan, Jordan, Italy and Germany
25 June 2011
Italy
Date of Inscription: 2011
Criteria: (ii)(iii)(vi)
Property : 14.08 ha

Buffer zone: 306.22 ha
Dossier: 1318
Serial: yes

Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026