World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Mount Kumgang – Diamond Mountain from the Sea
Mount Kumgang – Diamond Mountain from the Sea
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Assistance
Mount Kumgang – Diamond Mountain from the Sea

Mount Kumgang is a long-celebrated place of exceptional natural beauty, renowned for its near-white granite peaks, deep valleys, waterfalls, and pristine ecosystems, rising to nearly 1,600 metres. The mountain’s dramatic impact is enhanced through constantly changing weather patterns of mists, rain, sunshine and clouds. This sacred mountain is a key site of mountain Buddhism, with traditions dating back to the 5th century. This cultural landscape is home to ancient hermitages, temples, stupas, and stone carvings, many located in the Outer and Inner Kumgang Area. Three temples remain active today and bear exceptional testimony to centuries of Buddhist practice, with tangible and intangible heritage deeply intertwined with the landscape.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Mount Kumgang – Diamond Mountain from the Sea is a long-celebrated place of exceptional natural beauty boasting outstanding scenery of lofty peaks, plunging valleys, waterfalls, pools and striking weathered rock formations. The property exhibits outstanding examples of geomorphological structure with several classic types of weathering. Spectacular near-white, polished granite geomorphology is set within pristine lush forests, grasslands, wetlands and sub-alpine shrublands at the higher elevations of nearly 1,600 metres above sea level. The mountain’s dramatic impact is enhanced through constantly changing weather patterns of mists, rain, sunshine and clouds. The property’s arresting landscapes are further transformed by each of the four seasons. Uninterrupted vistas from Mount Kumgang’s ridgetops to the coastline attest to the intimate relationship of the property to the sea. 

Mount Kumgang is an associative cultural landscape where there is a complex and intertwined relationship between the distinctive landforms and scenery, and the long history of Buddhism, pilgrimage and traditions of mountain worship in the Korean peninsula. As the eastern guardian of the Buddhist realm, the serial property of two component parts demonstrates exceptional aspects of Korean mountain Buddhist culture over many centuries, and is a place that many Buddhists aspire to visit within their lifetimes.

The landscape setting of steep granite peaks, rock formations, waterfalls and pools are integral to the long traditions of Buddhist pilgrimage, and the many famed literary and artistic representations of Mount Kumgang. The intangible cultural heritage of this landscape is further reflected in the naming of key features, poems and folk tales.

Buddhist hermitages date from the 5th century, and some of the very earliest remaining examples are found within the Outer Kumgang-Inner Kumgang Area component part. Temples, pagodas, steles, stupas, sculptures and stone lanterns attest to the sequence of development of Korean mountain Buddhism. The property also features significant examples of carved calligraphy and historic trails to famed scenic viewpoints. Some of the cultural heritage attributes also contain evidence of the intermingling of Buddhism with Taoism and local spirituality, such as mountain gods, the Great Bear, and wild animals. Three of the temples within the Outer Kumgang-Inner Kumgang Area component part are continuing places of Buddhist practices.

Criterion (iii): Mount Kumgang is a sacred mountain and bears an exceptional testimony to Korean mountain Buddhism traditions from the 5th century CE to the present. The traditions and practices of Buddhism over many hundreds of years and the historical role of Mount Kumgang as a major place are central to the Outstanding Universal Value of the property and demonstrate the ways in which the natural and cultural heritage attributes are intertwined. The extant temples, hermitages, stupas and stone engravings demonstrate these characteristics, in addition to the many songs, poems and artworks inspired by Mount Kumgang. The built attributes, together with continuing Buddhist practices and other associated intangible cultural heritage aspects demonstrate an exceptional inter-relationship between the tangible, intangible and scenic attributes of the associative cultural landscape.

Criterion (vii): The property exhibits an exceptionally rich diversity of distinctive near-white granite geomorphology, dramatically set within pristine biodiversity all subject to the interplay of seasonal variation and constantly changing meteorological conditions.  Mount Kumgang – Diamond Mountain from the Sea possesses enormous variety in its landforms from the differing relief on both sides of the range, numerous waterfalls and ponds, pristine water quality and varied seasonal colour palettes. The awe-inspiring natural beauty of the property is evident in the long association between human cultures and the place, the physical expressions of calligraphy, hermitages, temples and other elements juxtaposed with natural features and in the inspiration that artists, poets, religious leaders, pilgrims and people of all walks have drawn from the place in the past and continue to do so. The property affords uninterrupted vistas to the nearby coastline, a central element in the recognition of Mount Kumgang’s significance as a sacred mountain. 

Integrity

The property contains the cultural and natural heritage attributes required to demonstrate the Outstanding Universal Value. The substantial area enclosed by the boundaries is appropriate and provides sufficient protection of the cultural heritage attributes and the associative cultural landscape. The large buffer zone provides an added layer of protection, particularly against visual impacts on the integrity of the cultural landscape, and for the cultural meaning and importance of scenic locations and look-outs. The cultural heritage attributes are well-maintained with minimal threats, including those natural elements that can be considered to be attributes of the cultural landscape. Appropriate policies and management arrangements are in place to mitigate potential future threats from visitor pressures and tourism development.

The property includes all the elements and is of a sufficient size, design and boundary configuration to encompass the range of granitic geomorphological features and processes as well as the wide variety of attributes that collectively express the natural beauty and aesthetic value of the site.  The property’s naturalness is a key aspect of its exceptional natural beauty and protects near untouched natural ecosystems across six vertical vegetation zones reaching to the property’s ridgetop at over 1,600 metres above sea level. The catchments of all streams, waterfalls, pools and lagoons are located within the property thereby ensuring high standards of water quality. The property protects critical geosites and scenic features as well as the processes which sustain them. Walking trails and lookout access allow a full appreciation of the property’s natural and aesthetic value from ridgetop to the sea.

Areas surrounding the property have a history that is relatively free from large scale development and the natural systems of the property are in excellent to pristine condition due to low development pressure and long periods of strict protection. The wider region around Mount Kumgang is relatively undeveloped and the buffer zone has no reported industrial scale development, mining or commercial fishing activity. Agriculture and pastoralism in the buffer zone are restricted to small scale, mostly non-mechanised practices. The two most significant potential threats to the property are future tourism development; and climate change-driven increases in natural hazards.

Authenticity

The authenticity of the property has been established on the basis of the condition of the historic temples and other Buddhist elements (stone carvings, steles, sculptures and pagodas), archaeological sites, key natural features, and historical paths. Wooden structures such as the Phyohun Temple, Jongyang Temple, Podok Hermitage, Pulji Hermitage, and Chilsong Shrine of Mahayon Buddhist School site exhibit a high degree of authenticity in relation to the Outstanding Universal Value, although they are vulnerable due to their fragile materials, the need for continuing cultural knowledge and the need for ongoing conservation and maintenance. These structures are part of continuing Buddhist practices that contribute to the Outstanding Universal Value of the cultural landscape. While there are satisfactory conservation policies in place, the overall authenticity of the timber buildings and their tanchong (polychrome schemes) varies due to these factors, as well as the impacts of past damages. Conservation plans for the temples is recommended in order to further secure their authenticity and state of conservation.

Protection and management requirements

The property is State-owned and principally protected by the Law of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea on the Protection of Cultural Heritage (amended and supplemented in 2018) and the Law of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea on the Protection of Scenic Spots and Natural Monuments (amended and supplemented in 2018). These laws are supplemented by a range of other laws and regulations covering land, nature reserves, environment, forestry, urban management and marine pollution.  The World Heritage property and buffer zone sits almost entirely within the UNESCO Biosphere Reserve which affords an additional protective and sustainable development context. 

A number of the individually significant cultural heritage sites within the property are listed on the national register as either National Treasures or Preservation Heritage sites. There is also one protective designation for intangible cultural heritage associated with the property (Mount Kumgang Legend).

The governance system, whilst complex, involves various levels of government and places the National Authority for the Protection of Cultural Heritage (NAPCH) as the central authority with oversight of the heritage values of the property.  The management system, staffing and budgets are adequate given the low levels of use and low threats at the time of inscription. However, careful attention and anticipation will be needed to ensure a commensurate management capacity is in place in the face of planned significant tourism development within the property and the wider region.

While there are legal provisions for Environmental Impact Assessment, there are no explicit legal frameworks in place for Heritage Impact Assessment. The National Authority for the Protection of Cultural Heritage (NAPCH) conducts heritage impact assessments for developments within and near the property.

The management system is the responsibility of the Cabinet and the NAPCH. The NAPCH is responsible for the protection of both tangible and intangible cultural heritage, and both natural and cultural heritage, enabling cultural and natural heritage to be coherently administered. Day to day management and maintenance of the property is provided by local caretakers. The Buddhist Federation of Korea closely cooperates with relevant institutions responsible for the protection and management of the property. The buffer zone is monitored and managed by the respective local authorities (the People’s Committees of Kosong, Kumgang and Thongchon counties).

Management of the site is guided by a Management Plan (2021-2030), including an action plan for its implementation. It should be revised and updated in line with the proposed Mount Kumgang Tourism Development Plan to ensure the protection of Mount Kumgang’s Outstanding Universal Value is paramount. The Mount Kumgang Tourism Development Plan elaborates the directions for future tourism development, based on the policy framework of the management plan. The configuration of the buffer zone coupled with use and development controls provides an effective layer of additional protection for the property and facilitates important connectivity from the property’s ridgetops to the sea. 

News  1
UNESCO World Heritage: 26 new sites inscribed
17 July 2025
Democratic People's Republic of Korea
Date of Inscription: 2025
Criteria: (iii)(vii)
Property : 19,827.86 ha

Buffer zone: 70,349.6 ha
Dossier: 1642
Serial: yes

Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

Protections
by other conservation instruments

1 protection / 1 element

Biosphere Reserves (1 element)

Mount Kumgang

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026