World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Hawaii Volcanoes National Park
Hawaii Volcanoes National Park
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Hawaii Volcanoes National Park

This site contains two of the most active volcanoes in the world, Mauna Loa (4,170 m high) and Kilauea (1,250 m high), both of which tower over the Pacific Ocean. Volcanic eruptions have created a constantly changing landscape, and the lava flows reveal surprising geological formations. Rare birds and endemic species can be found there, as well as forests of giant ferns.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief Synthesis

Hawaii Volcanoes National Park contains Mauna Loa and Kilauea, two of the world’s most active and accessible volcanoes where ongoing geological processes are easily observed. This property serves as an excellent example of island building through volcanic processes. Through the process of shield-building volcanism, the park's landscape is one of relatively constant, dynamic change.

Criterion (viii): This property is a unique example of significant island building through ongoing volcanic processes. It represents the most recent activity in the continuing process of the geologic origin and change of the Hawaiian Archipelago. The park contains significant parts of two of the world's most active and best understood volcanoes, Kilauea and Mauna Loa. The volcano Mauna Loa, measured from the ocean floor, is the greatest volcanic mass on earth.

Integrity

The original national park, as inscribed on the World Heritage List, is nearly 88,000 hectares, large enough to protect the geologic values for which the property was inscribed. Of these 88,000 hectares, 73% is designated as wilderness under the Wilderness Act of 1964, providing a high degree of protection. In 2004 the national park was increased in size by adding another 47,000 hectares (the Kahuku Unit), providing additional protection to the inscribed property. Visitation, while significant, is carefully planned and managed and does not pose a threat to the park’s geological resources.

The park does contend with a number of invasive species which threaten its numerous endemic and endangered plant and animal species. Most of the park is fenced, which has helped greatly in reducing the threat from ungulates. However, fencing is not effective against smaller mammals or against reptiles, birds and spores and seeds. While invasives do not impact the park’s Outstanding Universal Value under criterion (viii), they do pose a threat to the park’s ecological integrity and require active management.

Protection and management requirements

Designated by the U.S. Congress in 1916 as a national park, Hawai‘i Volcanoes is managed under the authority of the Organic Act of August 25, 1916 which established the United States National Park Service. In addition, the park has specific enabling legislation which provides broad congressional direction regarding the primary purposes of the park. Numerous other federal laws bring additional layers of protection to the park and its resources. Day to day management is directed by the Park Superintendent. The park was designated as a Biosphere Reserve in 1980.

Park management plans for the property have identified a number of resource protection measures, such as environmental assessment processes, zoning, ecological integrity and visitor monitoring, and education programs to address pressures arising from issues both inside and outside the property. A new General Management Plan was completed in 2016 which provides an updated 15-20 year vision for park management. The new General Management Plan recommends wilderness designation for nearly 49,000 hectares within the Kahuku unit.

Part of the park’s mandate is to provide access to volcanic resources and lava. Visitor safety is therefore a serious concern and management direction and actions are designed to protect visitors and employees from any effects of the active volcano, including lava, fumes, earthquakes, or tsunamis.

In addition, the National Park Service has established Management Policies which provide broader direction for all National Park Service units, including Hawai‘i Volcanoes.

The national park works closely with other land and water management agencies on the island of Hawai‘i to protect resources within the larger landscape. In particular, the park is a member of the Three Mountain Alliance, the largest watershed partnership in the state. The Three Mountain Alliance brings together federal, state and private landowners to identify and develop strategies for landscape-scale conservation on an area of over 450,000 contiguous hectares on the island of Hawai‘i.

The park honors Native Hawaiian people, protects Native Hawaiian historic and archeological sites and resources and preserves Native Hawaiian culture and values. Native Hawaiians believe that the park land is, 'Aina a ke akua e noho ai- the land where the god dwells and that the Goddess Pelehonuamea makes her home in the crater Halema‘uma‘u at the summit of Kilauea. Mauna Loa and Kilauea are sacred cultural landscapes and the park supports Native Hawaiian practices and consults with Native Hawaiian communities in order to ensure that the Hawaiian culture lives on.
Notes
Property inscribed for both geological and ecological values under natural criterion N (ii) before 1994. Criterion N (i) [Operational Guidelines 2002] was added. For more details see Decision 30.COM 8D.1.
Links
Facebook: Hawai'i Volcanoes National Park

Hawai'i Volcanoes National Park

Hawaii Volcanoes National Park (U.S. National Park Service)

Protectedplanet.net

News  2
Collaboration between Two Volcanic World Heritage Sites on Managing Risks to Visitors
3 May 2013
"Passport" booklet highlighting United States’ World Heritage sites published
16 November 2012
Media
play_arrow Hawaii Volcanoes National Park (UNESCO/NHK)
United States of America
Date of Inscription: 1987
Criteria: (viii)
Property : 87,940 ha

Dossier: 409
Serial: yes

Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

1990
Protections
by other conservation instruments

1 protection / 1 element

Biosphere Reserves (1 element)

Hawaiian Islands

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026