World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Castles of Augustusburg and Falkenlust at ...
Castles of Augustusburg and Falkenlust at Brühl
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Castles of Augustusburg and Falkenlust at Brühl

Set in an idyllic garden landscape, Augustusburg Castle (the sumptuous residence of the prince-archbishops of Cologne) and the Falkenlust hunting lodge (a small rural folly) are among the earliest examples of Rococo architecture in 18th-century Germany.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Set in an idyllic garden landscape, begun by architect Johann Conrad Schlaun, and finished by François de Cuvilliés, Augustusburg Castle, the sumptuous residence of the prince-archbishops of Cologne, and the Falkenlust hunting lodge, a small rural folly, are among the earliest and best examples of 18-century Rococo architecture in Germany, and directly linked to the great European architecture and art of unprecedented richness of the time. In 1725, Clemens August of Bavaria (1700-1761), Prince-Elector and archbishop of Cologne, planned and constructed this large residence at Brühl on the foundations of a medieval castle. It consists of three wings built of brick with rough-cast rendering and has two adjoining orangeries, one on the south side which includes an oratory, while the other to the north houses various service buildings.

The Castle of Augustusburg, a bold and successful revamping of the lack-lustre construction of Schlaun and the hunting lodge of Falkenlust, a dazzling creation, ex nihilio, are one of the best examples of the Rococo style, this international art of unprecedented richness. At Augustusburg, the staircase of Balthasar Neumann – considered a work of creative genius – is a rapturous structure which unites a lively movement of marble and stucco, jasper columns and caryatids, and culminates in the astonishing frescoed ceiling of Carlo Carlone. The central block, the wings of the parade, and the private apartments are organised in a hierarchy of effects of outstanding conception, while the décor “bon enfant” of the new grand summer apartments, with its faience tiles from the Low Countries, opposes the “official” programme.

The Castle of Falkenlust stands in its own small park. It was built by François de Cuvilliés between 1729 and 1737 for Prince-Elector of Cologne, Clemens August, to practise his favourite sport of falconry. The main building has two floors and is built in the style of a country house in brick with a rough-cast rendering. It is flanked by two rectangular single-storey buildings, which originally housed the Prince Elector´s falcons and are now mainly used for exhibitions.

Falkenlust is a country house with symmetrical avant-corps. On the ground floor, an oval salon is conceived in the same language of improvisation, charm, and liberty François de Cuvilliés was known for in his work. In the Chapel, the Bordelais Laporterie, an astonishing marine grotto was created, its walls faced with shells and concretions.

The large gardens of Augustusburg and Falkenlust, laid out in a single campaign, both oppose and complement each other.

At Augustusburg, Dominique Girard (ca. 1680 – 1738, pupil of Le Nôtre) proved more aware of landscape decor, multiplying monumental ramps and symmetrical flowerbeds, as those of the gardens of Nymphenburg, Schleissheim, and the Belvedere of Vienna. The core of the gardens, situated on the south side of the Castle, is a two-part embroidery-like parterre that includes four fountains and the Mirror Pool fed by a small cascade, running from a circular basin with an impressive fountain. Alleys lined with lime-trees flank the embroidery parterre and lead to triangular boscages. The adjoining semi-circular park is enclosed by a ditch and a wall. The main alley is crossed diagonally by a second pathway, lined with lime trees, and leads south-east through the field to the Castle of Falkenlust.

At Falkenlust, the landscaping, although highly concentrated, nonetheless endeavours to create the randomness of a natural site.

Criterion (ii): Augustusburg and Falkenlust represent the first important creations of Rococo style in Germany. For more than a century, they were a model in the majority of the princely courts.

Criterion (iv): The castles and gardens of Augustusburg and Falkenlust are the eminent example of the large princely residence of the 18th century.

Integrity

The whole site comprising the Castle of Augustusburg, its park and gardens, and the Castle of Falkenlust, contains all the elements necessary to express the Outstanding Universal Value.

Authenticity

The original overall design of the Castles has been maintained to an exceptional extent. It has preserved its character as a Rococo electoral residence and has, in large part, been spared any subsequent transformations due to continued use and function as a residence and museum.

The gardens of Augustusburg Castle are among the few in Europe to have been restored to their original plan. They can be said to be the most authentic example of formal gardens in the French style outside of France.

Protection and management requirements

The laws and regulations of the Federal Republic of Germany and the State of North Rhine-Westphalia guarantee the consistent protection of the Castles of Augustusburg and Falkenlust. They are listed monuments according to § 2 and § 3 of the Act on the Protection and Conservation of Monuments in the State of North Rhine-Westphalia. Building activities within and outside the property are regulated by § 9 (2) Protection Law, Local Building Plans and regional Land Use Plans. Furthermore, the property is protected by the Federal Nature Conservation Act. The castles are opened to the public as museums.

The State of North Rhine-Westphalia, as owner of the property, is responsible for the budget, the management, the conservation, and the sustainable use of the World Heritage site. Construction and conservation issues are organized and managed in close co-operation with the Office for the Conservation of Monuments of the Rhineland Regional Council (LVR – Amt für Denkmalpflege). The management system consists of a set of maintenance and conservation measures which is checked yearly and updated when required by a Steering Committee; members are representatives of the State, the District Government Office Cologne, the Palace Administration, and the Monument Conservation Office.

Links
Castles of Augustusburg and Falkenlust at Brühl (in German)

 View photos from OUR PLACE the World Heritage collection

Schlösser Augustusburg und Falkenlust in Brühl (Deutsche UNESCO-Kommission)

Media
play_arrow Castles of Augustusburg and Falkenlust at Brühl (UNESCO/NHK)
play_arrow NHK World Heritage 100 Series
Germany
Date of Inscription: 1984
Minor boundary modification inscribed year: 2024
Criteria: (ii)(iv)
Property : 89 ha

Buffer zone: 270 ha
Dossier: 288bis
State of North Rhine-Westphalia (Nordrhein-Westfalen)
N50 49 30.1 E6 54 35.2
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026