World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Residence of Bukovinian and Dalmatian ...
Residence of Bukovinian and Dalmatian Metropolitans
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Residence of Bukovinian and Dalmatian Metropolitans

The Residence of Bukovinian and Dalmatian Metropolitans represents a masterful synergy of architectural styles built by Czech architect Josef Hlavka from 1864 to 1882. The property, an outstanding example of 19th-century historicist architecture, also includes a seminary and monastery and is dominated by the domed, cruciform Seminary Church with a garden and park. The complex expresses architectural and cultural influences from the Byzantine period onward and embodies the powerful presence of the Orthodox Church during Habsburg rule, reflecting the Austro-Hungarian Empire policy of religious tolerance.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Situated within the boundaries of the town of Chernivtsi, on the river promontory, named Mount Dominic, the architectural ensemble comprises the former Residence of the Metropolitans with its St. Ivan of Suceava Chapel; the former seminary and Seminary Church, and the former monastery with its clock tower within a garden and landscaped park. The Residence, with a dramatic fusion of architectural references, expresses the 19th century cultural identity of the Orthodox Church within the Austro-Hungarian Empire during a period of religious and cultural toleration. In the 19th century, historicist architecture could convey messages about its purpose and the Residence of Bukovinian and Dalmatian Metropolitans is an excellent example.

Criterion (ii): Chernivtsi architectural ensemble of the Residence of the Bukovinian and Dalmatian Metropolitans reflects social, economical and cultural influences on the development of architecture and urban planning since ancient times, the Middle Ages, absolutism and the Gruender period. The complex represents a version of 19th century historicist architecture and planning.

Criterion (iii): The Residence bears exceptional testimony to the cultural tradition of the Orthodox Church which is signified by the use of Byzantine forms for the domed cruciform church, while the decorative patterns, incorporated in the tiled roofs of the complex signify the folk culture of the people. The prosperous Bukovinian Metropolitanate with episcopacies on territories of Southern and Central Europe ceased to exist in 1940.

Criterion (iv): The ensemble of the Residence, combining elements of national, Byzantine, Gothic and Baroque architecture, is an outstanding example of 19th century historicist architecture, design and planning, expressing the cultural identity of the Orthodox Church within the Austro-Hungarian Empire.

Integrity

The condition of integrity is satisfactory. The property includes within its boundary all elements necessary to express its cultural value and all of the components are adequately preserved.

Authenticity

The conditions of authenticity are generally adequate. The original shaped wooden ceiling of the Synod Hall was lost to fire in 1942 and was replaced in the 1950s. The roof has been gradually replaced using quality colour-glazed roof tiles manufactured according to the original patterns and imported from Austria. The change of function of the ensemble, initially being the Residence of Metropolitans and becoming a university did not unduly affect its authenticity.

Protection and management requirements

The Residence of the Bukovinian and Dalmatian Metropolitans was declared a National Park in 1945. The property on its 8 ha site was transferred to Yuriy Fedkovich Chernivtsi National University under the Ministry of Education of Ukraine in 1955.  The nominated property and its buffer zone are protected at both regional and national level by regulations and laws. A protection contract is signed annually with the Chernivtsi City Council, covering the responsibilities of the University to the property in terms of use and maintenance. The State funding “Comprehensive program on Preservation of historical architecture in Chernivtsi for 2009-2015” provides a basis for the systematic conservation and management of the property and for implementing protection measures in compliance with national standards for the protection of World Heritage sites. The General Development Plan for Chernivtsi gives main outlines for proper management of the property with special attention to the growth of tourist infrastructure as one of the major branches of the municipal economy. The outline Management Plan prepared in 1998 is to be reviewed every five years. A separate Tourism management plan is to be developed for the property to tackle the long-term consequences of the tourism pressure. A conservation plan will be developed for the gardens and park behind the Residence.

Links
Yuriy Fedkovych Chernivtsi National University

News  2
World Heritage sites participate in Earth Hour
28 March 2012
Four new sites inscribed on UNESCO's World Heritage List
28 June 2011
Ukraine
Date of Inscription: 2011
Criteria: (ii)(iii)(iv)
Property : 8 ha

Buffer zone: 244.85 ha
Dossier: 1330
N48 17 48 E25 55 29
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026