World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Paseo del Prado and Buen Retiro, a landscape ...
Paseo del Prado and Buen Retiro, a landscape of Arts and Sciences
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Paseo del Prado and Buen Retiro, a landscape of Arts and Sciences
Located at the urban heart of Madrid, this cultural landscape evolved since the creation of the tree-lined Paseo del Prado avenue, a prototype of the Hispanic alameda, in the 16th century. The avenue features major fountains, notably the Fuente de Apolo and the Fuente de Neptuno, and the Fuente de Cibeles, an iconic symbol of the city, surrounded by prestigious buildings. The site embodies a new idea of urban space and development from the enlightened absolutist period of the 18th century. Buildings dedicated to the arts and sciences join others in the site that are devoted to industry, healthcare and research. Collectively, they illustrate the aspiration for a utopian society during the height of the Spanish Empire, linked to the enlightened idea of democratization of knowledge, and exercised major influence in Latin America. The 120-hectare Jardines del Buen Retiro (Garden of Pleasant Retreat), a remnant of the 17th-century Buen Retiro Palace, constitutes the largest part of the property. The site also houses the terraced Royal Botanical Garden and the largely residential neighbourhood of Barrio Jerónimos with its rich variety of 19th- and 20th-century buildings that include cultural and scientific venues.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The Paseo del Prado and Buen Retiro, a landscape of Arts and Sciences is located at the urban heart of Madrid. It includes the Paseo del Prado as the prototype of a Hispanic alameda (tree-lined avenue) from the 16th century and modified in the 18th century, a designed public space providing natural elements within the city for the enjoyment of its citizens. The property is an example of a new idea of urban green space and of an urban development model from the enlightened absolutist period of the 18th century. This model exercised influence in Latin America, illustrating the aspiration for a utopian society in Spanish overseas territory. Three major and adjacent parts, the Paseo del Prado, Jardines del Buen Retiro (Gardens of the Buen Retiro) and the Real Jardín Botánico (Royal Botanic Garden), combine culture and nature as a designed cultural landscape in an urban environment that has evolved over centuries. It was a new concept and a complex project with a clear social element that included the establishment of an innovative group of buildings and facilities dedicated to science and to educating the public, and which would also embellish the city. Buildings dedicated to the arts and sciences joined others devoted to industry, healthcare and research in a 200-hectare cultural landscape. Its special links to arts and sciences increased over time, resulting in an extraordinary area that is still dedicated to nature for the leisure of citizens, together with museums, cultural institutions, research and scientific centres.

Criterion (ii): The Paseo del Prado is believed to be the first public green space designed within a European capital in the early modern period. It is a tree-lined avenue, originating in the 16th century though substantially modified in the 18th century, that had a strong influence in Spanish America as a model contributing to town development. It was the first and an important example of an alameda or paseo.

Criterion (iv): The Paseo del Prado and Buen Retiro is an urban development model, featuring nature and culture, of the enlightened absolutist period, a prototype of a new idea of improvement of urban space with a strong social content guided by rational criteria to enhance ornamentation, hygiene and functionality. It is an important expression of enlightened ideals applied to town development projects with the distinctive addition of the sciences as an essential component, all with a view to making knowledge widely available to citizens. Its different parts are adjacent and linked by the idea of creating a great urban space featuring natural elements (composed of a tree-lined avenue, park and botanical garden) in different stages of history from the Renaissance to the Enlightenment.

Criterion (vi): The Paseo del Prado and Buen Retiro represents a utopian society linked to the arts and the sciences, the paradigm of culture, within a framework of natural elements within the city. It also represents the idea of making knowledge available to citizens, providing access to the sciences and arts, in an area which is otherwise devoted to leisure. It was an idea to improve society that crossed the borders of Spain and extended to Latin America. The arts, sciences, healthcare, industry and research are all part of an exchange of human and scientific values that promote the dissemination of knowledge, and their public and social roles have been preserved with outstanding vitality.

Integrity

All attributes of Outstanding Universal Value are preserved within the property’s boundaries; they are in good condition, are adequately maintained and no significant neglect has been identified. The property retains its integrity as a planned series of urban developments. None the less, challenges to integrity include the ambitious enlargement of museums and historical buildings in the past, as well as the presence of a large sporting complex in the Gardens of the Buen Retiro. Additional issues relate to the vegetation and some urban fabric, such as pavements. Factors to be managed include short-term intense uses and overexploitation, adaptation to climate change, specifically in relation to the trees in the Paseo del Prado, Jardines del Buen Retiro and Real Jardín Botánico, as well as traffic and air pollution.

Authenticity

The attributes of the property have demonstrated authenticity which is supported by extensive original documents, plans, etc. in municipal archives such as the Archivo de Villa, and others such as the archives of the Real Jardín Botánico. The green areas, the Paseo del Prado, Jardines del Buen Retiro and Real Jardín Botánico mostly retain their historical use and function. Many of the buildings on the Hill of Sciences are still used as originally intended, and other buildings such as the Prado Museum and the Atocha railway station preserve their original use. However, authenticity has been diminished by changes to the historical interiors of some buildings.

Protection and management requirements

The three main green areas comprising most of the property are listed as Properties of Cultural Interest (Bien de Interés Cultural), the highest legal protection available, along with more than 30 other elements (fountains and monuments) and 40 major buildings included within the property. About 300 individual trees are protected through inclusion in municipal inventories and the Catálogo de Árboles Singulares de la Comunidad de Madrid.

Three different institutional levels are involved in the legal protection of the property: national, providing the general framework with the Ley de Patrimonio Histórico Español (LPHE, Ley 16/1985), regional (Ley de Patrimonio Histórico de la Comunidad de Madrid, Ley 3/2013) and municipal, as the whole area is protected by the Madrid General Urban Development Plan (PGOUM). A buffer zone has not yet been established although consideration is being given to its creation based on the PGOUM.

A new management system has been tested and implemented and takes account of existing public and private management initiatives. It is based on coordination between many parties, including public and private institutions, professional corporations and local associations. It is designed to function at different levels, promoting engagement with the property by citizens and stakeholders. This system coordinates different departments and agencies involved in the property, particularly the institutional agencies with legal responsibilities, and addresses implementation by different groups: a World Heritage Commission, composed of the three institutional levels (state, region and local), a Scientific Council, composed of independent experts, and an Advisory Civic and Social Council formed of the representatives of the three administrations, private institutions, professional corporations, neighbourhood and heritage associations, and cultural and scientific institutions and other stakeholders. The role and independence of the Civic and Social Board could be enhanced as a means of ensuring community involvement. The inventory of all the buildings needs to be finalized. Further development and implementation of an interpretation strategy for the overall property and the full monitoring system, with special care to achieve an integrated approach, needs to be addressed in the management system.

Links
Google Arts & Culture: Story

Activities 2
World Heritage Cities Programme
Cultural Landscapes
News  1
Cultural sites in China, India, Iran and Spain inscribed on UNESCO’s World Heritage List
25 July 2021
Spain
Date of Inscription: 2021
Minor boundary modification inscribed year: 2023
Criteria: (ii)(iv)(vi)
Property : 237 ha

Buffer zone: 2,255 ha
Dossier: 1618bis
N40 24 55.2 W3 41 13.4
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2025 2023
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026