World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Eisinga Planetarium in Franeker
Eisinga Planetarium in Franeker
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Eisinga Planetarium in Franeker
Built between 1774 and 1781, this property is a moving mechanical scale model of the solar system as it was known at the time. Conceived and built by an ordinary citizen – the wool manufacturer Eise Eisinga – the model is built into the ceiling and south wall of the former living room/bedroom of its creator. Powered by one single pendulum clock, it provides a realistic image of the positions of the Sun, the Moon, the Earth and five other planets (Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter and Saturn). The planets revolve around the Sun in real time and the distance between the planets is at scale. The model fills the entire ceiling of the room, making it one of the earliest predecessors of the ceiling and projection planetariums of the 20th and 21st centuries.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Located in a modest house within the historic centre of Franeker, the Koninklijk Eise Eisinga Planetarium (Royal Eise Eisinga Planetarium) is the oldest continuously operating planetarium (i.e. orrery) in the world. Built between 1774 and 1781, this accurately working model of our solar system provides an up-to-date and realistic image of the positions of the Sun, the Moon, the Earth and the five other planets that were known at the time (Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter and Saturn).

Conceived and largely built by an ordinary citizen – the wool manufacturer Eise Eisinga – the planetarium mechanism is ingeniously built into the ceiling and the closet-bed wall of the living room. Doing this made it possible to build a large orrery and to use the room beneath it as a reception and presentation area – just as in modern planetariums. To this day, it is open to the public and used as an educational centre dedicated to astronomy.

The fact that the mechanism is still in working order is evidence of the ingenuity and foresight of its maker, who left detailed instructions for its maintenance.

Criterion (iv): The Koninklijk Eise Eisinga Planetarium (Royal Eise Eisinga Planetarium) is an outstanding example of an 18th-century orrery, representing exceptional creativity in its technical design and execution. The orrery provides an up-to-date and realistic image of the positions of the Sun, the Moon, the Earth and the five other planets that were known at the time. The planetarium mechanism is ingeniously attached to the original beam construction of the house, which was specially adapted for this purpose. In operation almost continuously since 1781, it consists of simple but robust components, such as wooden hoops and discs, and iron pins. As a technological ensemble, it continues to contribute to the dissemination of astronomical knowledge, and in particular to the understanding of the heliocentric model of the Universe. The property is also associated with the transfer of scientific knowledge to a wider audience in 18th-century society.

Integrity

The property includes all constituent elements of the mechanical planetarium, including those that allow its functioning as well those associated with its presentation and the building in which it is located and to which the planetarium mechanism is inextricably linked. This 18th-century depiction of the solar system fills the entire ceiling of the former living room/bedroom of Eise Eisinga. The planets hang like wooden balls from metal rods that protrude through the slots in the ceiling. The mezzanine space above the ceiling houses the pendulum clock and the cogwheels. Despite being made of ordinary materials, such as wood, the mechanism is still in full use and continues to work according to its original design. Thanks to a very strict maintenance regime, almost all the original parts have been preserved.

Authenticity

In operation almost continuously since 1781, the planetarium instrument has retained a high level of authenticity. Aside from necessary repairs, the various components of the instrument have remained unchanged since its completion. Two important sources of information help confirm the authenticity of the property: the first complete description of it, published in 1780 by Franeker University professor Jean Henri van Swinden; and the description and maintenance instructions left by Eise Eisinga in 1784. The almost complete series of guest books that have been kept from the very beginning also attest to its educational significance.

Protection and management requirements

The planetarium building has been designated as a national monument since 1967. In addition, the property bears the blue and white shield, the international distinguishing mark to identify cultural heritage properties protected by the 1954 Hague Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict.

The property and its buffer zone are part of the larger protected cityscape of the inner city of Franeker. The protection of this area falls under the Environment and Planning Act. World Heritage occupies a special state-controlled position under this Act. The State provides mandatory instruction rules for provinces and municipalities in order to regulate matters in their environmental ordinances or environmental plans. All the rules relating to the living environment are included in the environmental plan. This concerns a balanced allocation of functions to locations (comparable to the current designations), as well as rules in respect of activities with consequences for the living environment.

Since 2001, the management of the planetarium has been in the hands of the Royal Eise Eisinga Planetarium Foundation. The board of the foundation consists of five members from scientific fields (University of Groningen and scientific journalism), the financial sector (accountancy) and local representatives. The day-to-day business is carried out by a managing director and nine employees. The municipality of Waadhoeke has a structural subsidy relationship with the planetarium.

Since it came into operation in 1781, maintenance of the planetarium instrument has taken place on the basis of the instructions of its maker. Approximately every twelve to fifteen years, the planetarium mechanism undergoes major maintenance. In addition, the cogwheels are cleaned, lubricated and waxed annually. All this work is carried out by regional professionals, under the supervision of the curator. Because the property consists mainly of wooden parts, these are checked every two years for the presence of woodworm and longhorn beetle.

Links
Royal Eise Eisinga Planetarium

Netherlands (Kingdom of the)
Date of Inscription: 2023
Criteria: (iv)
Property : 0.009 ha

Buffer zone: 21.2 ha
Dossier: 1683
N53 11 14.55 E5 32 37.51
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026