World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Archaeological Ruins of Liangzhu City
Archaeological Ruins of Liangzhu City
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Archaeological Ruins of Liangzhu City

Located in the Yangtze River Basin on the south-eastern coast of the country, the archaeological ruins of Liangzhu (about 3,300-2,300 BCE) reveal an early regional state with a unified belief system based on rice cultivation in Late Neolithic China. The property is composed of four areas – the Area of Yaoshan Site, the Area of High-dam at the Mouth of the Valley, the Area of Low-dam on the Plain and the Area of City Site. These ruins are an outstanding example of early urban civilization expressed in earthen monuments, urban planning, a water conservation system and a social hierarchy expressed in differentiated burials in cemeteries within the property.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The Archaeological Ruins of Liangzhu City was the centre of power and belief of an early regional state in the Circum-Taihu Lake Area. It is located on a plain criss-crossed by river networks in the eastern foothills of the Tianmu Mountains in the Yangtze River Basin on the southeast coast of China.

The property is composed of four areas: Area of Yaoshan Site; Area of High-dam at the Mouth of the Valley; Area of Low-dam on the Plain – Causeway in Front of the Mountains; and Area of City Site.

The Archaeological Ruins of Liangzhu City reveals an early regional state with rice-cultivating agriculture as its economic base, and social differentiation and a unified belief system, which existed in the Late Neolithic period in China. With a series of sites, including the City Site built during ca. 3300-2300 BCE, the Peripheral Water Conservancy System with complex functions and socially-graded cemeteries (including an altar), and the excavated objects represented by series of jade artefacts symbolizing the belief system, as well as its early age, the property represents the remarkable contributions made by the Yangtze River Basin to the origins of Chinese civilization. In addition, the pattern and functional zoning of the capital, together with the characteristics of the settlements of the Liangzhu culture and of the Outer City with the terraces, support strongly the value of the property.

Criterion (iii): The Archaeological Ruins of Liangzhu City, as the centre of power and belief of Liangzhu culture, is an outstanding testimony of an early regional state with rice-cultivating agriculture as its economic base, and social differentiation and a unified belief system, which existed in the lower reaches of the Yangtze River in the Late Neolithic period of China. It provides unparalleled evidence for concepts of cultural identity, social and political organization, and the development of society and culture in the late Neolithic and early Bronze Age in China and the region.

Criterion (iv): The Archaeological Ruins of Liangzhu illustrates the transition from small-scale Neolithic societies to a large integrated political unit with hierarchy, rituals and crafts. It includes outstanding examples of early urbanization expressed in earthen monuments, city and landscape planning, social hierarchy expressed in burial differentiations in cemeteries within the property, socio-cultural strategies for organization of space, and materialization of power. It represents the great achievement of prehistoric rice-cultivating civilization of China over 5000 years ago, and as an outstanding example of early urban civilization.

Integrity

The four component parts of the Archaeological Ruins of Liangzhu City include all the identified attributes necessary to convey its significance as an outstanding representation of a prehistoric early state and urban civilization in the Yangtze River Basin.

The property contains all material elements of the archaeological ruins, four main man-made elements, i.e. the City Site, the Peripheral Water Conservancy System, the socially-graded cemeteries (including an altar), and excavated objects represented by jade artefacts, as well as the natural topography that is directly linked to the function of the sites.

The buffer zone includes the historical environmental elements associated with the value of the property, such as mountains, isolated mounds, bodies of water and wetlands, but also includes scattered contemporaneous archaeological remains surrounding the ancient city, as well as the intrinsic association of value between different sites and their spatial layout and pattern.

The impact of urban development and construction and natural factors threatening the property have been properly addressed.

Authenticity

Sites in the four areas, including the City Site, the Peripheral Water Conservancy System, the socially-graded cemeteries (including an altar), preserved as archaeological sites, carry the authentic historical information of the heritage of the period ca. 3300-2300 BCE, including characteristics in site selection, space and environment, location and layout, contour of remains, materials and technologies, and historical function of the sites, as well as the internal connection between the overall layout of the property and individual elements, and the historical natural environment of the distribution region of the sites. The objects unearthed from the four areas represented by jade artefacts authentically preserve the shape, categories, decorative patterns, functions, materials and the complex processing technologies and exquisite craftsmanship of the artefacts. Together with the archaeological sites, they authentically and credibly demonstrate the degree of development of the rice-cultivating civilization in the lower reaches of the Yangtze River in the Neolithic period and provide a panorama of Archaeological Ruins of Liangzhu City as an early regional urban civilization.

Protection and management requirements

Three components sites, Area of Yaoshan Site (01), Area of Causeway in Front of the Mountains (03-2), and Area of City Site (04) of the Archaeological Ruins of Liangzhu City, have obtained the highest-level national protection and are located in the Key Protection Subzone within the protection range of “Liangzhu Archaeological Site”, a National Priority Protected Site for the protection of cultural relics. The Area of High-dam at the Mouth of the Valley (02) and Area of the Low-dam on the Plain (03-1) were listed as Provincial Protected Sites of Zhejiang in 2017, and an application is being processed for listing them as National Priority Protected Sites.

The property is owned by the State and is protected by relevant laws and regulations such as the Law of the People’s Republic of China on the Protection of Cultural Relics, Regulations for the Implementation of Law of the People’s Republic of China on the Protection of Cultural Relics, and Administrative Regulations of Zhejiang Province on the Protection of Cultural Relics, and enjoys both national and provincial-level status in protection.

Special protection policies and regulations for the property have been formulated and improved, including Regulations for the Protection and Management of Liangzhu Archaeological Site of Hangzhou (revised in 2013), and a series of special regulations for heritage protection has been prepared, issued and implemented, including the Conservation Master Plan for the Liangzhu Archaeological Site (2008-2025) as a National Priority Protected Site, and monitoring over the property and its surroundings is also strengthened.

All four areas of the Archaeological Ruins of Liangzhu City share the same buffer zone and are managed effectively in a uniform way by a common management authority – the Hangzhou Liangzhu Archaeological Administrative District Management Committee.

It has a clear system for division of work and responsibilities, complete functions, sufficient technical and management staff specializing in protection, sufficient resources of funds, and complete facilities.

Various protection and management regulations will be strictly implemented, environmental capacity and development and construction activities in the property area will be effectively controlled, and negative impacts on the property from the pressures of various developments will be curbed; demands of stakeholders will be coordinated and taken into overall consideration, and the balance between the protection of the property and developments in tourism and urban construction will be kept, both rationally and effectively.

Research, interpretation and dissemination of the heritage value will be strengthened; the integrated function of the property, including cultural tourism and ecological protection, will be brought into play appropriately, and a sustainable and harmonious relationship between the protection of Archaeological Ruins of Liangzhu City and the development of Yuhang District and Hangzhou City will be maintained.

Links
Weibo account (in Chinese only)

Official website page (in Chinese only)

News  1
Seven cultural sites inscribed on UNESCO’s World Heritage List
6 July 2019
China
Date of Inscription: 2019
Criteria: (iii)(iv)
Property : 1,433.66 ha

Buffer zone: 9,980.29 ha
Dossier: 1592
Serial: yes

Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026