World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Kaziranga National Park
Kaziranga National Park
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Assistance
Kaziranga National Park

In the heart of Assam, this park is one of the last areas in eastern India undisturbed by a human presence. It is inhabited by the world's largest population of one-horned rhinoceroses, as well as many mammals, including tigers, elephants, panthers and bears, and thousands of birds.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
Hindi
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Kaziranga National Park represents one of the last unmodified natural areas in the north-eastern region of India. Covering 42,996 ha, and located in the State of Assam it is the single largest undisturbed and representative area in the Brahmaputra Valley floodplain. The fluctuations of the Brahmaputra River result in spectacular examples of riverine and fluvial processes in this vast area of wet alluvial tall grassland interspersed with numerous broad shallow pools fringed with reeds and patches of deciduous to semi-evergreen woodlands. Kaziranga is regarded as one of the finest wildlife refuges in the world. The park’s contribution in saving the Indian one-horned rhinoceros from the brink of extinction at the turn of the 20th century to harbouring the single largest population of this species is a spectacular conservation achievement. The property also harbours significant populations of other threatened species including tigers, elephants, wild water buffalo and bears as well as aquatic species including the Ganges River dolphin. It is an important area for migratory birds.

Criterion (ix): River fluctuations by the Brahmaputra river system result in spectacular examples of riverine and fluvial processes. River bank erosion, sedimentation and formation of new lands as well as new water-bodies, plus succession between grasslands and woodlands represents outstanding examples of significant and ongoing, dynamic ecological and biological processes. Wet alluvial grasslands occupy nearly two-thirds of the park area and are maintained by annual flooding and burning. These natural processes create complexes of habitats which are also responsible for a diverse range of predator/prey relationships.

Criterion (x): Kaziranga was inscribed for being the world’s major stronghold of the Indian one-horned rhino, having the single largest population of this species, currently estimated at over 2,000 animals. The property also provides habitat for a number of globally threatened species including tiger, Asian elephant, wild water buffalo, gaur, eastern swamp deer, Sambar deer, hog deer, capped langur, hoolock gibbon and sloth bear. The park has recorded one of the highest density of tiger in the country and has been declared a Tiger Reserve since 2007. The park’s location at the junction of the Australasia and Indo-Asian flyway means that the park’s wetlands play a crucial role for the conservation of globally threatened migratory bird species. The Endangered Ganges dolphin is also found in some of the closed oxbow lakes.

Integrity

The perimeter of Kaziranga on three sides is adjacent to human settlements leading to challenges in protecting the site from illegal incursions of poachers and herdsmen. The introduction of rinderpest and domestic buffaloes has had negative effects on the wild water buffalo population, including hybridisation and genetic swamping of the remaining wild stock. Poaching of rhino has been a serious problem but the overall population levels are steady or rising. Another issue is seasonal flooding which causes many animals to migrate outside the park where they are susceptible to hunting and reprisal for crop damage. The presence of the busy national highway No. 37 along the southern border of Kaziranga has brought increased settlements which disturb wildlife movements in this landscape.  While river migration has also resulted in the loss of some 5,000 ha of forest land from 1925 to 1986, the national park has been enlarged to the north to include part of the River Brahmaputra, although this area has not yet been proposed for inclusion within the World Heritage property. Maintenance of functional connectivity between the park and Karbi Anglong Hills, and the formation of a buffer zone to the south of the park would greatly add to the integrity of the park.

Protection and management requirements

The property receives the highest legal protection and strong legislative framework under the provisions of the Indian Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972 and Indian Forest Act, 1927/Assam Forest Regulation 1891. The park has a long history of protection for over a century, reflected in the dramatic recovery of the rhino. The park has been declared as a Tiger Reserve in 2007 and there have been six additions to the park area which has improved management and protection efforts. The property benefits from government support at both national and regional levels as well as involvement of national and international conservation organisations. The site is managed under the administration of the Assam Forest Department, guided by a legally approved Management Plan. The present state of protection and conservation of the property is regarded as one of the best in India. However, key threats include rhino poaching, riverbank erosion, invasive species, tourism pressure, heavy highway traffic, and livestock grazing (particularly in the areas which have been added to the park).  The management needs a long-term strategy for dealing with tourism-related issues, research and monitoring for habitat and wildlife, human-wildlife conflicts and boundary issues relating to the addition areas to the national park. In order to ensure sustained financial flows which are essential for the functioning of the park, the constitution of the Kaziranga Tiger Conservation Foundation has been a landmark measure. The management has also taken steps towards improving infrastructure and staff welfare provisions. Strengthening institutional linkages with other government departments and line agencies for the benefit of the local communities in the fringe villages around the property remains an important management objective for the park authorities.

Links
Official website page

Twitter account

Facebook page

The official Website of Ministry of Tourism

Protectedplanet.net

Activities 2
UNFIP - UNESCO Agreement
Enhancing our Heritage- Monitoring and managing for success in World Natural Heritage sites
News  2
Nearly Three-Quarters of World Heritage Sites Are at High Risk from Water-Related Hazards
1 July 2025
UN On-line Volunteers and World Heritage
5 June 2013
Media
India
Date of Inscription: 1985
Criteria: (ix)(x)
Property : 42,996 ha

Dossier: 337
State of Assam
N26 40 0 E93 25 0
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2011 2009 2008 2002 2001 2000 1999 1997
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026