World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Archaeological Area and the Patriarchal ...
Archaeological Area and the Patriarchal Basilica of Aquileia
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Archaeological Area and the Patriarchal Basilica of Aquileia

Aquileia (in Friuli-Venezia Giulia), one of the largest and wealthiest cities of the Early Roman Empire, was destroyed by Attila in the mid-5th century. Most of it still lies unexcavated beneath the fields, and as such it constitutes the greatest archaeological reserve of its kind. The patriarchal basilica, an outstanding building with an exceptional mosaic pavement, played a key role in the evangelization of a large region of central Europe.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Located at the northern end of the Adriatic Sea on the Natissa (Natiso) River, the property includes the Archaeological Area and the Patriarchal Basilica of Aquileia. The Roman city dates to 181 BCE and became one of the largest and wealthiest cities in the early Roman Empire until it was sacked and destroyed in 452 by the Huns led by Attila.

The city was a major trading centre connecting the Mediterranean to Central Europe. Aquileia’s wealth and status within the empire was reflected in its magnificent public buildings and private residences many of which survive as archaeological remains. The archaeological area, covering 155 hectares, includes part of the forum and its Roman basilica (courthouse), the late antique horrea, one of the sets of baths, and two luxurious residential complexes. Outside the late Roman city walls, the entire course of which has been located and part of which stills survives, excavations have also revealed a cemetery with some impressive funerary monuments. Below ground archaeological remains of the amphitheatre and the circus have also been preserved.

The most striking remains of the Roman city are those of the port installations, a long row of warehouses and quays that stretch along the bank of the river. These were incorporated into the 4th century defences, substantial traces of which can be seen today.

The dominant feature of Aquileia is the Basilica, erected, primarily, in the early-Christian period. The imposing mosaic floor dates back to the Theodorian church built at the beginning of the IV century and rebuilt between the 11th and 14th century according to the Romanesque and Gothic style.

Most of Aquileia remains unexcavated beneath fields and, as a result, constitutes a unique archaeological reserve. Its Patriarchal Basilica is an outstanding building that houses an exceptional work of art in its mosaic pavement and also played a key role in the evangelization of a large region of central Europe. It became the seat of a Patriarchate which survived until 1751.

Criterion (iii): Aquileia was one of the largest and most wealthy cities of the Early Roman Empire.

Criterion (iv): By virtue of the fact that most of ancient Aquileia survives intact and unexcavated, it is the most complete example of an Early Roman city in the Mediterranean world.

Criterion (vi): The Patriarchal Basilican Complex in Aquileia played a decisive role in the spread of Christianity into central Europe in the early Middle Ages.

Integrity

The World Heritage property includes all the elements contributing to justify its Outstanding Universal Value, encompassing the Patriarchal complex of the Basilica and the whole extension of the Roman city. Most of the archaeological area remains intact as it is located beneath the small contemporary town and large areas of agricultural land. It is, therefore, probably the largest unexcavated Roman city in the whole Mediterranean world, and as such its potential for research is enormous.

Threats identified for the property relate primarily to water damage caused by flooding and water table level. In addition, the impact of traffic on the highway main street passing through the property was identified at the time of inscription.

Authenticity

Archaeological work began in Aquileia in the late 19th century and has continued, since that time, hand in hand with conservation and minimal reconstruction work, associated with meticulous archaeological and art-historical research. Some of the restoration work carried out on excavated archaeological areas in the decades immediately preceding and following World War II, however, would not be considered acceptable by current standards. This work involved the reconstruction of colonnades using bricks to fill missing portions of columns and importing stone slabs for paving, work that exceeds current limits of acceptable anastylosis. A more rigorous policy is now in operation, involving minimal intervention.

As a result, the authenticity of the property is high. For example, most of the original city of Aquileia remains buried and unexcavated beneath the modern small town and agricultural land, the layout and form of the Roman city survives intact. The area continues to function as a small urban centre although Aquileia’s role as a major trading centre was replaced by Venice many centuries ago.

The Patriarchal Basilica has retained its religious function. The present building, with its cruciform layout, dates from the 9th century although its foundations are from the Roman period. Its original Romanesque style has largely survived impacted only by Gothic features that reflect a reconstruction programme following a mid-14th century earthquake.

Most of the work undertaken at the Basilica has followed the principles of the Charter on the Conservation and Restoration. Moreover, the restoration and conservation of the mosaic floors in the interior and the restoration of the baptistery have been done following the strictest conservative criteria.

Protection and management requirements

The entire area inscribed on the World Heritage List is protected under the Legislative Decree 42/2004, Code of Cultural Heritage and Landscape a safeguarding measure which ensures that any activity on the site must be authorized by the relevant Superintendence (peripheral office of the Ministry for Cultural Heritage and Activities).

Ownership is shared between the Italian State (excavated areas, museums), the Roman Catholic Church (the Basilica complex), the Municipality of Aquileia, and private individuals.

The urban planning (called Piano Regolatore Generale-PRG) refers specifically to the cultural importance of the property and reinforces the limitations provided by the legislative protection.

Overall responsibility for supervision of the protection by legislation rests with the peripheral offices of the Ministry for Cultural Heritage and Activities, based in Trieste, which manages the archaeological sites and museums. A comprehensive plan for the management of the properties has been prepared and this provides for regular conservation projects and also special research and restoration activities. The Church authorities manage the Basilican complex and have a detailed programme of conservation and restoration activities. The municipality actively controls all activities within its competence. It is worthy of comment that it is very supportive of all activities designed to extend the protection and presentation of its heritage.

Since 2008, beside municipality and the Superintendence, the Fondazione Aquileia has been involved in the management of the property The Fondazione is a juridical body established jointly by the Ministry, Region Friuli Venezia Giulia, Municipality of Aquiliea, and Province of Udine with a principal mission focused on strategic planning for cultural development and general suggestions for territorial activities relating to the management of the property. Fondazione Aquileia manages some areas assigned by the Ministry, for valorization, conservation, and restoration.

Links
Aquileia Official website

Google Arts & Culture: Story

Associazione Nazionale per Aquileia

Pro Loco Aquileia

PromoTurismoFVG

Museo Archeologico Nazionale di Aquileia

Basilica di Aquileia

Soprintendenza Archeologia del Friuli Venezia Giulia

Fondazione Aquileia

News  3
International Day for Monuments and Sites 2021 - Complex Pasts: Diverse Futures
16 April 2021
UNESCO launches new travel platform ‘World Heritage Journeys’ to promote sustainable tourism in the EU
13 September 2018
UNESCO World Heritage Committee Adds 30 Sites to World Heritage List
2 December 1998
Media
play_arrow Archaeological Area and the Patriarchal Basilica of ... (UNESCO/NHK)
Italy
Date of Inscription: 1998
Minor boundary modification inscribed year: 2017, 2018, 2025
Criteria: (iii)(iv)(vi)
Property : 155.43 ha

Buffer zone: 391.02 ha
Dossier: 825quater
Province of Udine, Friuli-Venezia Giulia Region
N45 46 6 E13 22 3
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026