World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Historic Fortified Town of Campeche
Historic Fortified Town of Campeche
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Historic Fortified Town of Campeche

Campeche is a typical example of a harbour town from the Spanish colonial period in the New World. The historic centre has kept its outer walls and system of fortifications, designed to defend this Caribbean port against attacks from the sea.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief Synthesis

The Historic Fortified Town of Campeche, located in the State of Campeche, was founded in the 16th century on the coast of the Gulf of Mexico, in the Maya region of Ah-Kim-Pech by Spanish conquerors. It was the most important seaport at the time and played a major role for the conquest and evangelization of the Yucatan Peninsula, Guatemala and Chiapas. Its commercial and military importance made it the second biggest town in the Gulf of Mexico, after Mérida. Due its port importance in the sea route: Spain, Havana, Campeche, and Veracruz; as point of embarkation of the natural riches of the peninsula and political differences of the kingdoms of the old continent, ring the second half of the 16th century, Campeche, like other Caribbean towns, was systematically attacked by pirates and corsairs in the pay of enemies of Spain; this is why a large-scale defensive system was installed. This military defensive system for mid-17th century was inadequate and poorly strategic so a new fortification, hexagonal wall, integrating eight bastions, four doors and walls, was authorized, with construction started in 1686 and concluding in 1704. Subsequently, to complete the system of fortifications, the redoubt of San Jose on the east Hill of the village and the redoubt of San Miguel on the west Hill, as well as the batteries of San Lucas, San Matias and San Luis, is mainly in the area of historic monuments, at both ends and facing the sea were constructed. 

The sea was the starting point of the Villa of San Francisco of Campeche and the construction of the military defensive system directed the urban growth and the development of this walled and baroque city. An urban chequerboard plan was chosen, with a Plaza Mayor facing the sea and surrounded by government and religious edifices. The walls enclose an irregular hexagon corresponding to the defensive belt encircling the town. The surrounding areas, named barrios, encompass religious buildings, civil and military architecture with Renaissance, Baroque and eclectics characteristics, emphasizing the military. In the 19th century, the town endowed itself with a fine theatre, harmonized with the urban fabric. A section of the wall was pulled down in 1893 to open up a space with a view of the sea, and the main square was turned into a public garden. In the 20th century, the traditional areas of the town centre were little affected by the modernization movement owing to a relative slackening of the economy.

The area of historic monuments is in the shape of an uneven polygon spread over 181 ha, including 45 ha surrounded by walls, with the town stretching out on each side, following the configuration of the coast and the relief. The protected group consists of two subgroups: area A with a high density of buildings of great heritage significance, and area B, which is not so dense but which forms a transitional and protective zone. The almost 1,000 heritage buildings include the Cathedral of the Immaculate Conception, several churches, the Toro theatre and the municipal archives, among others.

Criterion (ii): The harbour town of Campeche is an urbanization model of a Baroque colonial town, with its checkerboard street plan; the defensive walls surrounding its historic centre reflect the influence of the military architecture in the Caribbean.

Criterion (iv): The fortifications system of Campeche, an eminent example of the military architecture of the 17th and 18th centuries, is part of an overall defensive system set up by the Spanish to protect the ports on the Caribbean Sea from pirate attacks.

Integrity

The inscribed property encompasses 181 ha which include all necessary elements to convey the Outstanding Universal Value of the property. The area of historic monuments is a coherent reflection of colonial architecture. The very well conserved system of fortifications illustrates military engineering during the period of Spanish colonialism in the Caribbean. The property maintains good conservation conditions which ensure the physical integrity of heritage buildings.

Authenticity

The area of historic monuments and the system of fortifications have a high degree of authenticity because of the small number of transformations and interventions. Restoration works make use of traditional techniques and materials.

The authenticity of the historical centre is, to a large extent, due to the continuity of a traditional family lifestyle, with manifestations of a rich intangible heritage, illustrated by local music, dances, cooking, crafts, and clothes.

Protection and management requirements

Legal protection is ensured by the 1972 federal legislation on Monuments and Archaeological Areas and by the application of regulations of 1975 under which all modifications to buildings must receive prior authorization. A Federal Decree of 1986 lists the area of historic monuments of Campeche and places it under the authority of the National Institute of Anthropology and History (INAH), to function as a regulator and to authorize any kind of intervention in historic monuments within the historical monuments area the exterior and interior of the historical monument.

 At the state level, the Coordination of Sites and Monuments of the Cultural Heritage of Campeche was created in 1998 for the management and protection of monuments in the city of Campeche. In 2009, the State Secretary of Culture was established, leaving such coordination as sub office working in the dissemination of tangible and intangible heritage activities.

At the municipal level, a number of prescriptions regulate the conditions for carrying out work. Conservation is regulated by the partial plan of development for the municipality of Campeche; The urban director program, the regulation for construction for the municipality of Campeche, updated and published in 2009; the Urban Image for the municipality of Campeche and the Partial program of preservation and improvement of the historical centre and traditional wards of the city of Campeche, published in the “Diario Oficial of the State of Campeche”, on 18 March 2005.

Currently, the Congress, through the National Council for Culture and the Arts and the Ministry of Social Development, allocates resources to the municipality for the implementation of projects centred on restoration, improvement of urban infrastructure, urban facilities and services, among others. The city of Campeche manages and administers these resources through the Bureau of Urban Development and the Bureau of Buildings and Services.

 It is important to delimit the surrounding areas around the historical monuments of the city of Campeche and protect the traditional neighbourhoods of Santa Ana, Santa Lucia and Chapel, dating from the 16th and 17th centuries which were excluded from the Presidential Decree of 1986. It is also important to establish regulatory measures for the urban corridors that give access to the heritage area, for the improvement and maintenance of the property.

Links
 View photos from OUR PLACE the World Heritage collection

Activities 4
World Heritage Cities Programme
Fortifications and the World Heritage Convention – Valdivia Chile 2004 and Campeche Mexico 2005
Promoting local businesses in Mexican World Heritage Cities
Culture|2030 Indicators National Profile of the Mexico
News  1
World Heritage Committee Inscribes 48 New Sites on Heritage List
2 December 1999
Events  1
Mexico's World Heritage Sites Photographic Exhibition at UN Headquarters
24 Feb 2006 - 28 Feb 2006
Media
play_arrow Historic Fortified Town of Campeche (UNESCO/NHK)
Mexico
Date of Inscription: 1999
Criteria: (ii)(iv)
Property : 181 ha

Dossier: 895
State of Campeche
N19 50 47.004 W90 32 13.992
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026