World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Castel del Monte
Castel del Monte
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Castel del Monte

When the Emperor Frederick II built this castle near Bari in the 13th century, he imbued it with symbolic significance, as reflected in the location, the mathematical and astronomical precision of the layout and the perfectly regular shape. A unique piece of medieval military architecture, Castel del Monte is a successful blend of elements from classical antiquity, the Islamic Orient and north European Cistercian Gothic.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Castel del Monte, located in the municipality of Andria, rises on a rocky hill dominating the surrounding countryside of the Murgia region in southern Italy near the Adriatic Sea. A unique piece of medieval architecture, it was completed in 1240. The castle’s location, its perfect octagonal shape, as well as the mathematical and astronomical precision of its layout all reflect the broad education and cultural vision of its founder, Emperor Frederick II.

As a leader of modern humanism, the Germanic Emperor brought scholars together in his court from throughout the Mediterranean, combining Eastern and Western traditions. The castle’s unique design, an octagonal plan with octagonal towers at each angle, represents a search for perfection. Interior features reflect Eastern influences, such as the innovative hydraulic installation used by Frederick II for bathing in accord to the typical Arabic customs.

The site is of outstanding universal value in its formal perfection and its harmonious blending of cultural elements from northern Europe, the Muslim world and classical antiquity. Castel del Monte is a unique masterpiece of medieval architecture, reflecting the humanist ideas of its founder, Frederick II of Hohenstaufen.

Criterion (i): Given its formal perfection and harmonious blending of cultural elements from northern Europe, the Muslim world and classical antiquity, Castel del Monte is a unique masterpiece of medieval military architecture which reflects the humanist ideas of its founder, Frederick II of Hohenstaufen.

Criterion (ii): Inseparably linked to Frederick II of Hohenstaufen, the building of Castel del Monte illustrates the cosmopolitan spirit of the Emperor who brought together Greek, Arab, Italian and Jewish scholars to his court in Palermo. This designates him as one of the precursors of the modern humanists.

Criterion (iii): Symbolic of the Mediterranean policy of a Germanic Emperor who was born at Iesî, brought up in Sicily and attracted at a very early age by the Oriental world, Castel del Monte combines intellectual and moral elements from the great Mediterranean civilizations in one creation.

Integrity

The integrity of the site has been protected, in part, due to the fact that the castle has not undergone any significant structural alteration. Marble and mosaic interior decorative elements, however, have deteriorated and in many cases been removed.

The perimeter of the property includes the castle, which rises solitarily on top of its hill, and an immense protected area around the castle that is subject to landscape protection and provides an effective buffer zone. Taken together, the two areas fully represent the exceptional nature of the site, some characteristics being monumental in type and in excellent state of preservation, while others are more percipient and, considered alongside the physical setting, ensure the overall integrity.

Authenticity

Castel del Monte has been subjected to almost no structural alteration, which has allowed it to maintain authenticity in a number of principle areas. The castle’s setting is unchanged as it is still found on a rocky peak dominating the surrounding landscape. Its original octagonal form and interior design have been retained. In terms of construction materials, the exterior limestone block construction is intact while the interior has been degraded by the removal or decay of its marble and mosaic decoration. Additionally two original sculptures are in the Bari Picture Gallery. However, there have been few later interventions. Conservation work since 1878 has been of good quality and consistent with Italian standards. Therefore the authenticity of the monument is high.

Protection and management requirements               

The monument was acquired by the Italian State in 1876 and is protected under several State laws. Under the terms of Law No 1089/39 concerning the artistic, archaeological and cultural heritage of the Italian State, it was declared to be of great artistic and historical importance by the decree of the Ministry for Cultural Heritage and Activities in 1978. The landscape of a large area around the castle, which coincides with the buffer zone (10,847.3 hectares), is protected by another ministerial decree under the law 1497/1939, integrated in the national Law “Codice dei beni culturali e del paesaggio” which concerns the protection of cultural heritage.

Management of the monument is in the hands of the Soprintendenza per i Beni Architettonici e Paesaggistici per le Province di Bari, Barletta-Andria-Trani e Foggia. This peripheral office of the Ministry of Cultural Heritage and Activities and Tourism. is responsible for the maintenance and guardianship of the monument, which is open to visitors. It also carries out appropriate conservation work, the scale and nature of which depends upon available financial resources.

Links
Castel del Monte

Puglia Regional Museum Directorate

Castel del Monte Facebook Page (in Italian only)

Castel del Monte Instagram account (in Italian only)

Castel del Monte - Tickets

News  1
Four World Heritage sites in Cyprus and Italy granted “enhanced protection” in the event of armed conflict
29 November 2010
Media
play_arrow Castel del Monte (UNESCO/NHK)
Italy
Date of Inscription: 1996
Criteria: (i)(ii)(iii)
Property : 3.1 ha

Buffer zone: 10,847.3 ha
Dossier: 398rev
Communes of Andria and Corato, Province of Bari, Puglia Region
N41 5 5.3 E16 16 15.4
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
Protections
by other conservation instruments

2 protections / 2 elements

Geoparks (1 element)

MurGeopark UNESCO Global Geopark
Second Protocol to the 1954 Hague Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict (1 element)

Castel del Monte

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026