World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Bergpark Wilhelmshöhe
Bergpark Wilhelmshöhe
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Bergpark Wilhelmshöhe

Descending a long hill dominated by a giant statue of Hercules, the monumental water displays of Wilhelmshöhe were begun by Landgrave Carl of Hesse-Kassel in 1689 around an east-west axis and were developed further into the 19th century. Reservoirs and channels behind the Hercules Monument supply water to a complex system of hydro-pneumatic devices that supply the site’s large Baroque water theatre, grotto, fountains and 350-metre long Grand Cascade. Beyond this, channels and waterways wind across the axis, feeding a series of dramatic waterfalls and wild rapids, the geyser-like Grand Fountain which leaps 50m high, the lake and secluded ponds that enliven the Romantic garden created in the 18th century by Carl’s great-grandson, Elector Wilhelm I. The great size of the park and its waterworks along with the towering Hercules statue constitute an expression of the ideals of absolutist Monarchy while the ensemble is a remarkable testimony to the aesthetics of the Baroque and Romantic periods.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Inspired by the dramatic topography of its site, the Hercules monument and water features of the Bergpark Wilhelmshöhe created by the Landgrave Carl from 1689 combine in an outstanding demonstration of man’s mastery over nature. The monumental display of rushing water from the Octagon crowned by the massive Hercules statue via the Vexing Grotto and Artichoke Basin with their hydro pneumatic acoustic effects, Felsensturz Waterfall and Giant’s Head Basin down the Baroque Cascade to Neptune’s Basin and on towards the crowning glory of the Grand Fountain, a 50 metre high geyser that was the tallest in the world when built in 1767, is focused along an east-west axis terminating in the centre of the city of Kassel. Complemented by the wild Romantic period waterfalls, rapids and cataracts created under Carl’s great-grandson the Elector Wilhelm I, as part of the 18th century landscape in the lower part of the Bergpark, the whole composition is an outstanding demonstration of the technical and artistic mastery of water in a designed landscape. Together with the 11.5m high copper sheets Hercules statue towering above the park and visible from many kilometres, which represents an extraordinary sculptural achievement, they are testimony to the wealth and power of the 18th & 19th century European ruling class.

Criterion (iii): The towering statue of Hercules and the water displays of the Bergpark Wilhelmshöhe are an exceptional symbol of the era of European Absolutism.

Criterion (iv): The water displays of Bergpark Wilhelmshöhe are an outstanding and unique example of monumental water structures. Cascades of similar size and artificial waterfalls of comparable height can be found nowhere else. The Hercules statue, towering over the 560 hectare park, is both technically and artistically the most sophisticated and colossal statue of the Early Modern era. The ensemble of water features with their monumental architectural settings is unparalleled in the garden art of the Baroque and Romantic periods.

Integrity

The nominated property includes all elements necessary to express its values and does not suffer from adverse effects of development or neglect. All water features except the New Waterfall are still operable and together with the Hercules Monument preserve their visual integrity and setting.

Authenticity

The nominated property is authentic in terms of its form and design, materials and substance, use and function, techniques, location and setting. The technology required for the water features has been preserved, complete and functional.

Protection and management requirements

The property is protected by laws of the Federal Republic of Germany including the Regional Planning Act, Town and Country Planning Code, Federal Nature Conservation Act, the Environmental Impact Assessment Act, and the Federal Forest Act, as well as by the laws of the Federal State of Hesse including the Act on the Protection of Cultural Monuments, the Hessian State Planning Act, Hessian Forest Act, the Hessian Act on the Implementation of the Federal Nature Conservation Act, and the Hessian building regulations. The property is protected in its entirety by the Hessian Act on the Protection of Cultural Monuments. The property is managed under the direction of a Steering Committee comprising representatives of the Hessian Ministry of Higher Education, Research and Arts, the City of Kassel, the Museumslandschaft and Kassel County and served by a Steering Board, which is a panel of experts that appoints specialised task groups as required to work with the World Heritage Hesse Staff Unit within the Hessian State Office for the Preservation of Historical Monuments. The woods and open spaces of the water catchment areas of the Habichtswald are managed by the Hessen-Forst State Forestry Administration, Wolfhagen forestry office.

The Bergpark is considered as a protected complex in the Regional Plan North Hesse 2009, and as having recreational value within a pristine environment. According to the City of Kassel’s Urban Development Concept (2006) the traffic situation around the Bergpark will be improved, Wilhelmshöher Allee’s periphery will be finalised as a boulevard and certain roads through the park will be closed. The Management Plan for the Water features and Hercules within the Bergpark Wilhelmshöhe, prepared in 2008-2010 jointly by representatives of the State of Hesse, the city and county of Kassel, and citizens’ representatives is being implemented by the Steering Committee and focuses on protection and preservation of the monuments, garden buildings, natural resources, views and vistas, sustainable tourism and public use. Local citizens are involved in working groups and residents in the buffer zone are consulted on all planning matters relating to the Bergpark. Management will be improved by inclusion of a risk preparedness strategy.

Links
Deutsche UNESCO-Kommission

Hessen Kassel Heritage (in English only)

Activities 1
Cultural Landscapes
News  1
Sites in Germany and Italy bring to 19 the number of sites inscribed on the World Heritage List this year
23 June 2013
Germany
Date of Inscription: 2013
Criteria: (iii)(iv)
Property : 558.7 ha

Buffer zone: 2,665.7 ha
Dossier: 1413
N51 18 57 E9 23 35
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026