World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Cistercian Abbey of Fontenay
Cistercian Abbey of Fontenay
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Cistercian Abbey of Fontenay

This stark Burgundian monastery was founded by St Bernard in 1119. With its church, cloister, refectory, sleeping quarters, bakery and ironworks, it is an excellent illustration of the ideal of self-sufficiency as practised by the earliest communities of Cistercian monks.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Located in the Bourgogne Franche-Comté region in the Côte-d’Or Department in the commune of Marmagne, the Cistercian Abbey of Fontenay was founded in 1119 by St Bernard in a marshy valley of Bourgogne. With its austere architecture, church, cloister, refectory, sleeping quarters, bakery and its ironworks, it illustrates the ideal of self-sufficiency as practised by the earliest communities of Cistercian monks. 

Built between 1139 and 1147 by Abbot Guillaume thanks to the generosity of Ebraud, Bishop of Norwich, the Abbey of Fontenay was consecrated by Pope Eugene III, a Cistercian and former disciple of St Bernard. This form of Romanesque Cistercian church is of great simplicity and strict modesty with its basilic design in the form of a Latin cross, its blind nave, and transept devoid of a tower. The perfection of the proportions, the rigour of the wall openings and the science of the vaultings, the beauty of the wall masonry which places impeccable courses of ashlar side by side with crude rough-cut rubble constitute the value of this architecture.

The cloister and the chapter house have remained intact and were inspired from the same principles. Within its enclosing wall, the Abbey still retains other communal buildings: monks’ day room and dormitory, warming room, refectory, guest house, bakery and iron works. This last building, dating to the end of the 12th century, recalls the part which the Cistercians played in the technological progress of the Middle Ages, and is one of the oldest industrial buildings in France.

Criterion (iv): the austere architecture of the Cistercian monks represents the physical form of the moral and aesthetic ideals which flourished at various times in the history of western Christian religious communities. Thus, the Cistercian Abbey of Fontenay, agricultural and industrial centre, workplace and place of worship for small groups living in self-sufficiency, illustrates a significant historical movement of universal value.

Integrity

The Abbey of Fontenay and its site illustrates in an exemplary manner the Cistercian establishments.  Built in a remote location but near to a water source and agricultural land, and proscribing all decor but using a scholarly architecture on a monumental scale, presenting stark spaces adapted to the rigorous life according to monastic rule, but also specialised functional areas of great technical sophistication, the Cistercian abbeys form a family apart in western monastical architecture. Fontenay is one of the most complete examples and almost certainly the best conserved of all, preserving its unity and intact site. 

Authenticity

Throughout its history, the Abbey of Fontenay has known modernizations, new constructions (notably the Abbot’s Palace in the 17th century) and also demolitions (the refectory in the 18th century). Transformed into an industrial establishment after the Revolution and the sale of national properties, its restoration began in 1906.

Despite transformations undertaken in the 13th, 15th and 16th centuries, and the ruins accumulated in the 18th and 19th centuries, the Cistercian Abbey of Fontenay, restored after 1906, stands today as a largely authentic and well-preserved ensemble.

Protection and management requirements

Private property open to the public, the Abbey of Fontenay is listed as Historic Monument since 1862. It is surrounded by a vast site listed in 1989. Its protection is therefore assured, both under the Heritage Code and the Environment Code.

Its conservation and management are the responsibility of its owner, under the scientific and technical control of the State which, with territorial collectivities, participates, as the case may be, in the funding of conservation work.

The management of the greater part of the buffer zone is governed by the document for the management of the Fontenay forests (State forest) and Marmagne (communal forest), which includes landscape studies. The buffer zone could be revised to take a larger area into account.

Links
Facebook

L'Abbaye de Fontenay

Media
play_arrow Cistercian Abbey of Fontenay (UNESCO/NHK)
France
Date of Inscription: 1981
Minor boundary modification inscribed year: 2007
Criteria: (iv)
Property : 5.77 ha

Buffer zone: 1,397 ha
Dossier: 165bis
Department of Côte d'Or, Burgundy Region
N47 38 21.984 E4 23 20.796
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026