World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Sado Island Gold Mines
Sado Island Gold Mines
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Sado Island Gold Mines

The Sado Island Gold Mines is a serial property located on Sado Island, some thirty-five kilometres west of the Niigata Prefecture coast. It is formed of three component parts illustrative of different unmechanised mining methods. Sado Island is of volcanic origin and features two parallel mountain ranges stretching from southwest to northeast and separated by one alluvial plain, the Kuninaka Plain. Gold and silver deposits were formed by the rising of hydrothermal water close to the land surface and forming veins in the rock; tectonic activity first submerged the surface deposits to the seabed, which was later raised again by tectonic movements. Placer deposits were exploited in Nishimikawa Area, located on the north-western side of the Kosado Mountains. In addition, the weathering of the volcanic rock exposed ore veins, which were mined underground at the land surface and deep underground in the Aikawa-Tsurushi Area, at the southern end of the Osado Mountains range. Mostly tangible attributes reflecting mining activities and social and labour organisation are preserved as archaeological elements, both above and below ground, and landscape features.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The Sado Island Gold Mines is a serial property located on Sado Island, some thirty-five kilometres west of the Niigata Prefecture coast. It is formed of three component parts articulated around two main mining areas – the Nishimikawa Placer Gold Mine and the Aikawa-Tsurushi Gold and Silver Mine – illustrative of different unmechanised mining methods implemented during the Edo period (1603-1868). The first cluster covers a large mining area used for placer gold mining, including waterways necessary for placer mining. The second cluster includes two component parts connected by a route today interrupted for a short section and corresponding to the Nishi-Ikari-michi and Tsurushi-michi Pass. The two component parts of the second cluster cover two different mining areas – the Tsurushi Silver Mine and the Aikawa Gold and Silver Mine Area. The latter also includes part of the Aikawa-Kamimachi Town, in which the remains of the Sado Magistrate’s Office are found. Mostly tangible attributes reflecting mining activities and social and labour organisation are preserved as archaeological elements, both above and below ground, and landscape features.

The Sado Island Gold Mines forms an exceptional mining ensemble and landscape demonstrating the continuation and perfection of unmechanised mining and processing technology in a period when, elsewhere in the world, mechanisation was spreading in the mining industry.

Criterion (iv): The Sado Gold Mines is an exceptional example in the Asian context of the continuity of manual mining and smelting technology in a period when mechanisation was progressively being introduced elsewhere. The management system and social and work organisation deployed by the Tokugawa Shogunate at Sado made it possible to extract and process considerable quantities of high-quality gold for global standards in the 17th century. This is reflected in the mining area and settlement organisation. Based on the characteristics of ore deposits found on Sado Island, the Shogunate applied and integrated production organisation and methods most suitable for extracting and processing the ore. To guarantee the efficiency of operation, settlement, mining and processing functions coexisted in the same areas or in close proximity to one another.

Integrity

The Sado Island Gold Mines comprises the most important areas reflecting gold production processes applied on Sado Island during the Tokugawa Shogunate, such as mining methods adapted to different types of deposits, a series of production processes, and the transition of the controlled settlement system. The serial property comprises the two areas of the Nishimikawa Placer Gold Mine and the Aikawa-Tsurushi Gold and Silver Mine. It is of adequate size to ensure the complete representation of the attributes of the Outstanding Universal Value of the site. A significant number of human-modified landforms, archaeological remains of mines, mining operations infrastructures and ore-dressing and smelting sites and the archaeological vestiges of associated settlements, survive both on the surface and underground within the property.

The component parts still retain their key features, as past mining and settlement zones, and have not been destroyed or significantly altered. The sites of mining and settlements within the property are, as a whole, well preserved and managed appropriately by the owners or the custodial bodies based upon appropriate legal frameworks.

Authenticity

In Sado Island Gold Mines, the location of the key activities, the layout of land arrangements and modifications to carry out mining activities or to adapt them for residential or production purposes, physical traces of mining-related operations such as tunnels, waterways, and headraces, terraces, post-holes, landforms, as well as of ore-processing and administrative functions demonstrate the past use and functions carried out at these sites. The settlement zones have maintained their original layout, although their built fabric has changed, as well as the way in which spaces are used. The key sources of information for the authenticity and understanding of the functioning of the serial property are represented by ancient documentary records, especially drawings and images. These documents are crucial for understanding and interpreting the remains still on site.

Protection and management requirements

All component parts are designated as Important Cultural Landscapes or Historic Sites under the national Law for the Protection of Cultural Properties. The Important Cultural Landscapes designation relates to the inhabited areas, such as Sasagawa and Aikawa-Kamimachi Town, while the Historic Sites designation covers the mining areas. Protection is extended also to natural or artificial topographic features. Activities in both types of designation are regulated by the Agency for Cultural Affairs, which operates at the national level. Sado Municipality has issued guidelines to provide support in case of interventions within protected landscapes. For projects that may have the potential to have negative impacts on the attributes of the Outstanding Universal Value, heritage impact assessments will have to be carried out by the implementing body.

The buffer zone of Nishimikawa Area is protected under the Cultural Properties Act as an Important Cultural Landscape. The buffer zone for the Aikawa-Tsurushi component part is protected as Landscape Special District through the Landscape Act, including the portion encompassing the western offshore region of the buffer zone. A considerable portion of the land-based buffer zone to the west of Aikawa is also identified as an Important Cultural Landscape and hence protected under the Cultural Properties Act. This extends into the offshore region.

The heritage management system has established processes and protocols for ensuring connection and coordination at the national, prefectural and local government levels. The legislative and institutional frameworks ensure the protection of all three areas with a transparent hierarchy and referral of controls and decisions. Community engagement is enshrined in social processes and approaches from the national level down. The Sado City government structure allows for conservation activities to be complemented with programmes across other divisional areas, such as museums and tourism. It also allows for engagement with stakeholder entities, including the commercial and private sectors. A World Heritage Council will be established as a decision-making collegial body regarding World Heritage matters. The Council will be administered by Niigata Prefecture. Putting into operation decisions taken by the Council was the responsibility of the World Heritage departments of the Niigata Prefecture and Sado City.

A Comprehensive Management Plan acts as an umbrella document to clarify policies, procedures, concrete measures and the administrative management system. This plan is supported by existing preservation and management plans for the component parts (i.e. Nishimikawa, Tsurushi and Aikawa). Appropriate interpretation strategies are essential for understanding and communicating clearly and comprehensively the Outstanding Universal Value of the property and its historic development.

In the context of multiple land ownerships, both government and private, and local residents across the property, the Comprehensive Management Plan provides guidance through flowcharts on decision-making processes and the operation of activities such as heritage impact assessments. It includes a section that provides for the roles of various stakeholders, including each level of government responsibility. Regarding some key stakeholders, such as Golden Sado, it is indicated that appropriate agreements will be made, including aspects such as management, public access and use.

News  1
UNESCO World Heritage: 24 new sites inscribed
1 August 2024
Japan
Date of Inscription: 2024
Criteria: (iv)
Property : 750.9 ha

Buffer zone: 1,527.1 ha
Dossier: 1698
Serial: yes

Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026