World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Valongo Wharf Archaeological Site
Valongo Wharf Archaeological Site
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Valongo Wharf Archaeological Site

Valongo Wharf Archaeological Site is located in central Rio de Janeiro and encompasses the entirety of Jornal do Comércio Square. It is in the former harbour area of Rio de Janeiro in which the old stone wharf was built for the landing of enslaved Africans reaching the South American continent from 1811 onwards. An estimated 900,000 Africans arrived in South America via Valongo. The site is composed of several archaeological layers, the lowest of which consists of floor pavings in pé de moleque style, attributed to the original Valongo Wharf. It is the most important physical trace of the arrival of African slaves on the American continent.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Spanish
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Valongo Wharf Archaeological Site is situated on Jornal do Comércio Square in the dock area of Rio de Janeiro city. The wharf started being built in 1811 to facilitate the debarkation of enslaved Africans arriving in Brazil. It is estimated that up to 900,000 African captives entered the Americas via Valongo.

In physical terms the property consists of several archaeological layers. The lowest of these with floor pavings in pé de moleque style represents the remains of the Valongo Wharf. Later, more dominant layers relate to the Empress’ Wharf, constructed in 1843. The property’s characteristic is that it is a beach that was covered with extensive paving made of hewn stones of different sizes, forms and functions, with a ramp and steps leading down to the sea. It was built in an apparently simple process, not on a landfill, as was customary, but directly on the sand of the beach, following its natural contours.

Valongo Wharf Archaeological Site is the globally most significant remains of a landing point of enslaved Africans in the Americas and therefore carries enormous historical as well as spiritual importance to African Americans. Valongo Wharf can therefore be seen as unique and exceptional both from a material point of view and with regard to the spiritual associations to which it is tangibly related.

Criterion (vi): Valongo Wharf is the most important physical evidence associated with the historic arrival of enslaved Africans on the American continent. It is a site of conscience, which illustrates strong and tangible associations to one of the most terrible crimes of humanity, the enslavement of hundreds of thousands of people creating the largest forced migration movement in history. As the very location the African stepped onto American soil and with it into their new lives as enslaved labour, the site evokes painful memories, which many African Brazilians can strongly relate to. Preserving these memories, the vicinity of Valongo Wharf has become an arena for various manifestations celebrating African heritage on an ongoing basis.

Integrity

The modest fragments of Valongo Wharf, which were left exposed to the public after their excavation in 2011, encompass the complete remains of the original stone disembarkation wharf. The wharf’s function was originally related to auxiliary structures, such as warehouses, quarantine facilities, the lazaretto and the New African cemetery. These are either lost or preserved only as underground remains in the buffer zone and are legally protected.

As the debarkation point after long and painful journeys across the Atlantic Ocean, Valongo Wharf and the sea were closely related. Therefore, integrity is presently reduced by the disconnection between the archaeological site and the seafront which is removed as result of land reclamations in the dock area. To ensure legibility of the property, it is essential to undertake measures, which assist in reconnecting the sea to the archaeological site.

The intensification of real estate development on all sides of the property and, in particular, towards the sea front is of concern as it will continue to significantly transform the landscape and could have negative impacts on the perception of the property. As future excavations may uncover further auxiliary functions of the wharf, it is essential that detailed archaeological investigations are conducted before any project is undertaken. While the Special Urban Interest Area of Rio's Porto Region, which lies at a distance of about 50 metres to the site, is not included in the buffer zone, it will be necessary to ensure that developments will not negatively impact of the Outstanding Universal Value of the property.

Authenticity

Valongo Wharf Archaeological Site preserves the remains of Rio de Janeiro’s slave disembarkation wharf in the 19th century. Its earthen cover for the past 168 years has enabled this sensitive site to be preserved with the design of the former disembarkation slipway, drainage system and paving. No reconstruction was undertaken which retains the archaeological remains as an exact fragmented reflection of the early 19th century. These remains are authentic in terms of their material, location, workmanship, substance and, as much as can be perceived, design.

In addition, the modest physical remains are highly authentic in spirit and feeling evoking a memory reference and identity marker for the large Brazilian population of African origin and African Americans at large. This aspect is underlined by creation of religious rituals, such as the Washing of the Wharf, during the merely five years period that the site has been rediscovered.

Protection and management requirements

The Valongo Wharf Archaeological Site is protected by federal Law number 3924, of 26 July 1961 through its official registration on 25 April 2012. The stipulations of this protection are enforced by the Instituto do Patrimônio Histórico e Artístico Nacional (IPHAN) as the responsible body for its conservation and management.

The property is cherished by the African-Brazilian society, with communities committed on a daily basis to the site’s care and preservation. This is not only expressed in the religious value the site has been attributed but also the associated rituals established. The physical proximity of these actors, and even the fact that a church of the African cult (Iglesia Universal) will be next to the site to organize regular meetings, creates a strong feeling of community guardianship of the property.

The conservation of the site is supervised by IPHAN and supported by the Companhia de Desenvolvimento do Porto of Rio de Janeiro (CDURP). A conservation plan has been adopted to guide these processes. Regular monitoring and maintenance is needed to ensure protection of the site against erosion and the functionality of the rainwater drainage system via pumps. The conservation and management of the site will be overseen by a council instituted by IPHAN and involving civil society and federal, state and municipal institutions committed to the preservation of cultural heritage and/or linked to questions of interest to the population of African origin.

The site management plan requires to be finalized and an adequately resourced site management body needs to be created. Further minimalistic interpretation on site will allow visitors who may not visit the museum to gain a general understanding of the site’s multi-layered character. Special attention should be given to evaluating further urban developments in terms of their potential negative impact on the Outstanding Universal Value of the property before any construction approvals are granted as well as measures which aim at re-establishing the relationship between the property and Guanabara Bay.

Links
Google Arts & Culture: Story

Activities 1
Washing of the Valongo Wharf, Rio de Janeiro (Brazil)
News  2
International Day for Monuments and Sites 2021 - Complex Pasts: Diverse Futures
16 April 2021
Three new sites and two extensions added to UNESCO’s World Heritage List
9 July 2017
Brazil
Date of Inscription: 2017
Criteria: (vi)
Property : 0.3895 ha

Buffer zone: 41.6981 ha
Dossier: 1548
S22 53 49.6 W43 11 14.62
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

Protections
by other conservation instruments

1 protection / 1 element

Biosphere Reserves (1 element)

Mata Atlântica

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026