World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Canal du Midi
Canal du Midi
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Canal du Midi

This 360-km network of navigable waterways linking the Mediterranean and the Atlantic through 328 structures (locks, aqueducts, bridges, tunnels, etc.) is one of the most remarkable feats of civil engineering in modern times. Built between 1667 and 1694, it paved the way for the Industrial Revolution. The care that its creator, Pierre-Paul Riquet, took in the design and the way it blends with its surroundings turned a technical achievement into a work of art.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Located in the Occitan region, the Canal du Midi has 360 navigable kilometers and 328 structures (locks, aqueducts, bridges, spillways, tunnels, etc.). This civil engineering achievement, amongst the most extraordinary of the modern era, built between 1667 and 1694, paved the way for the Industrial Revolution. The concern for architectural aesthetics and man-made landscapes that inspired its designer, Pierre-Paul Riquet, made it not only a technical feat, but also a work of art.

The Canal du Midi is the initial part of the Deux-Mers Canal project which aimed to link the Mediterranean and the Atlantic by connecting several sections of waterways. It is the living testimony of the art and creativity of the engineers of the time of Louis XIV who triumphed over the difficult conditions of geography and hydrography to realize the immemorial dream of the "junction of the seas". Its wide-ranging technical and cultural impact inaugurated and influenced the modern era of creating navigable networks across the industrialized countries of Europe and North America.

The Canal du Midi has five elements, namely the main section that connects Toulouse (Haute-Garonne) to Étang de Thau at Marseillan along the Mediterranean coast  (Hérault) over a length of 240 km; the 36.6 km section between Moussan and Port-la-Nouvelle (Aude) which incorporates part of the former Canal de la Robine; the two branches that merge and flow into the canal at Naurouze (Aude) discharging the waters of the Montagne Noire; the Saint-Pierre Canal (1.6 km) which connects the main section of the Canal with the Garonne in Toulouse; the short section (0.5 km) that joins the Hérault to the round lock at Agde. One of the most remarkable features is the Saint-Ferréol dam on the Laudot River in the Montagne Noire region. It is the largest work of the entire canal and the most important civil engineering site of the time.

Criterion (i): The Canal du Midi is one of the most extraordinary civil engineering achievements of modern times.

Criterion (ii): The Canal du Midi is representative of the technological breakthrough that paved the way for the Industrial Revolution and contemporary technology. In addition, it associates technological innovation with great aesthetic concern in terms of architecture and in terms of man-made landscapes, an approach rarely found elsewhere.

Criterion (iv): The Canal du Midi is notable as the first major summit level canal built to meet a strategic territorial development objective. It represents, par excellence, a significant period of European history, that of river transport through the mastery of hydraulic civil engineering.

Criterion (v): As soon as it was built, the Canal du Midi became the most striking feature of the territory through which it ran, all the more integrated into the environment as it gently modelled the landscape.

Integrity

The Canal du Midi is still in operation with characteristics essentially unchanged since its creation. The numerous modifications that it has undergone over the centuries (initial adaptation to the Freycinet gauge, repairs, automation, crossings, modernization, etc.) have affected the civil engineering works but without threatening their uniqueness or heritage value.

However, the aging and dieback of the alignment plantations, particularly due to the contamination of plane trees by coloured canker, will inevitably greatly change the landscapes of the Canal du Midi in the coming years.

Authenticity

The engineering work of Pierre-Paul Riquet, designer and builder of the canal, is intact in its layout, in its water supply system, and in many of the structures. However, from the beginning of the 18th century, modifications and adaptations (in particular the work of Vauban), then reconstructions of structures and modernizations, caused the canal to evolve to improve its efficiency.

Riquet's work is ever present, and neither its significance nor its historical magnitude have been altered. The changes themselves have their own authenticity and value, as they reflect the evolution of engineering, applied technology, and canal management practices.

Management and protection requirements

The protection and enhancement of the structure are ensured by regulatory measures at the national level (under the Heritage Code and the Environmental Code). The Canal is protected as a listed site, and some of its elements are also protected as historic monuments. In addition, the surrounding areas of the canal are now protected, by their listing as landscape sites of the Canal du Midi, an area of ​​18,200 ha, concerning 74 urban and peri-urban communities. Listing procedures are still ongoing for the landscapes of the feed canals in order to complete the protection system around the property, in view of a new delimitation of the buffer zone.

The State, owner of the property, has entrusted the conservation and management to Voies navigables de France (VNF), a public institution under its supervision, which implements the necessary resources for this purpose.

The Prefect of the Occitanie region is responsible for coordinating the State services involved in the management of the site with VNF. A "Landscape and Architectural Integration Charter" sets out general guidelines that will form the basis of the management plan currently being drawn up. In parallel, contracts officialize local partnerships.

Finally, to respond to the massive degradation of the alignment plantations, the manager implements with the public authorities a global approach to conservation and restoration in the respect of the canal's landscape features, aiming in particular at limiting the spread of the colored canker and eventually restoring the alignments of trees along the banks.

Links
Facebook

Official site - Canal du Midi

Google Arts & Culture: Story

 View photos from OUR PLACE the World Heritage collection

Home - Replantons le canal du Midi

Direction territorial Sud-Ouest (in French)

Voies navigables en France (in French)

Activities 1
World Heritage Earthen Architecture Programme (WHEAP)
News  1
International Day for Monuments and Sites 2021 - Complex Pasts: Diverse Futures
16 April 2021
Media
play_arrow Canal du Midi (UNESCO/NHK)
France
Date of Inscription: 1996
Criteria: (i)(ii)(iv)(vi)
Property : 2,007 ha

Buffer zone: 195,836 ha
Dossier: 770
Region of Midi-Pyrénées (departments of Haute-Garonne and Tarn); Region of Languedoc-Roussillon (departments of l'Aude and l'Herault)
N43 36 41 E1 24 59
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

1997
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026