World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Garamba National Park
Garamba National Park
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Assistance
Garamba National Park

The park's immense savannahs, grasslands and woodlands, interspersed with gallery forests along the river banks and the swampy depressions, are home to four large mammals: the elephant, giraffe, hippopotamus and above all the white rhinoceros. Though much larger than the black rhino, it is harmless; only some 30 individuals remain.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Covering vast grass savannas and woodlands interspersed with gallery forests and marshland depressions, Garamba National Park is located in the north-eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) in the transition zone between the dense tropical forests of the Congo Basin and the Guinea-Sudano savannas. It contains the last worldwide population of the northern white rhinoceros, endemic sub-species of Congolese giraffe and a mixed population of elephants, combining forest elephants, bush elephants and individuals demonstrating morphological characteristics common to the two elephant sub-species. It is also characterized by an exceptionally high level of biomass of great herbivores as a result of the vegetation productivity of the environment.  Extending over 490,000 ha and surrounded by 752,700 ha of three hunting grounds that contribute to an effective protection of the property against threats from the adjacent area, this property is an outstanding sanctuary with its unusual mix of large spectacular mammals.

Criterion (vii): Garamba National Park and its neighbouring hunting grounds offers a vast area scattered with a dense network of small permanent springs that support an exceptionally high plant productivity and herbivore biomass. This biomass translates for example in the presence of large herds of elephants at certain periods of the year, sometimes herds of more than 550 individuals, an exceptional natural phenomenon.

Criterion (x): Garamba National Park contains the four largest land mammals in the world, the elephant, the rhinoceros, the giraffe and the hippopotamus. The northern white rhinoceros population is the last surviving population of this sub-species. In addition, the sub-species of the Congolese giraffe is also endemic to the Park. Located in the transition zone between the Guinean-Congo and Guinean-Sudanese endemism centres, the Park and the nearby hunting domains contain a particularly interesting biodiversity with species typical of the two biogeographical zones. In addition to the rhinoceros and the giraffe, the purely savannicole species include the lion, the spotted hyena and numerous species of antelope. Furthermore, the species typical of the forest include the bongo, the forest hog, the chimpanzee and five species of small diurnal primates. The Park is also one of the rare places in Africa where one can observe both the African forest elephant Loxodonta africana cyclotis and the African bush elephant Loxodonta africana africana, as well as hybrid elephants presenting morphological characteristics common to both sub-species. A very large population of African buffalo also display intermediary forms between the forest buffalo Syncerus caffer nanus and the savannah buffalo Syncerus caffer aequinoctialis.

 Integrity

Garamba National Park is delineated to the east, south and west by major rivers that constitute natural and precise boundaries, recognized by all. To the north, it shares its boundaries with the Lantoto National Park in South Sudan, offering interesting possibilities of protection on the transfrontier and regional level. In a virgin landscape, no human presence or installations were indicated in the Park at the time of the nomination and the peripheral population was sparse. Garamba National Park is surrounded by three large contiguous hunting grounds, constituting an ecosystem of a sufficiently extensive area (1,242,700 ha) to support vast populations of large mammals with their local seasonal migration routes. The hunting grounds contribute towards the effective protection of the property against the threats from the surrounding zone. Their value is primordial, particularly for the seasonal movement of elephants and for the maintenance of viable populations of bush species.

Protection and management requirements

Garamba National Park has had the status of National Park since 1938 under the management authority of the Congolese Institute for Nature Conservation (ICCN). It is managed by the three administrative sectors of Nagero, Gangala na Bodio and Beredwa at the northern limit, each having buildings and road infrastructures. The establishment of a management plan is an indispensable condition in the management of the Park, given the importance of these hunting grounds for the integrity of the property, they should benefit from an integrated management with the Park.

It is essential that the integration of the local communities in the management of the Park and the peripheral hunting grounds, through a community conservation approach, be established through the participatory management of natural resources.

Surveillance is ensured by the guards through patrols in the three hunting grounds as well as in the Park, in liaison with regular aerial patrols of all these zones.  The tourism aspect has been developed and the possibility, unique in Africa, of tourism on elephant back existed; this activity could be revived once the security situation is more stable.

Partnerships with international bodies and sufficient fund-raising for an effective conservation of the property should also be reinforced, ideally including the creation of a Trust Fund.

Links
African Parks' Instagram page

African Parks' Twitter page

African Parks' Vimeo account

African Parks' Facebook page

Garamba, African Parks' website page

Protectedplanet.net

Activities 5
Biodiversity Conservation in Regions of Armed Conflict: Protecting World Heritage in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Rapid Response Facility (RRF)
World Heritage in the Congo Basin
Natural World Heritage in the Congo Basin
More add
News  22
UNESCO supports the protection of key species and lives of local communities in Garamba National Park
30 May 2022
Videos: Site managers report on Covid-19
26 October 2020
The Democratic Republic of Congo Mobilized for the Protection Endangered Animal Species
11 October 2018
In Memory of Rangers of World Heritage Sites
16 December 2016
More add
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Date of Inscription: 1980
Criteria: (vii)(x)
Property : 500,000 ha

Dossier: 136
Orientale Province
N4 0 0 E29 15 0
List of World Heritage in Danger

Inscription Year on the List of World Heritage in Danger

1996 - Present 1984 -1992
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2025 2024 2023 2021 2019 2018 2017 2016 2015 2014 2013 2012 2011 2010 2009 2008 2007 2006 2005 2004 2003 2002 2001 2000 1999 1998 1997 1996 1992 1991 1990 1989 1987 1986 1985 1984
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026