World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Fray Bentos Industrial Landscape
Fray Bentos Industrial Landscape
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Assistance
Fray Bentos Industrial Landscape

Located on land projecting into the Uruguay River west of the town of Fray Bentos, the industrial complex was built following the development of a factory founded in 1859 to process meat produced on the vast prairies nearby. The site illustrates the whole process of meat sourcing, processing, packing and dispatching. It includes buildings and equipment of the Liebig Extract of Meat Company, which exported meat extract and corned-beef to the European market from 1865 and the Anglo Meat Packing Plant, which exported frozen meat from 1924. Through its physical location, industrial and residential buildings as well as social institutions, the site presents an illustration of the entire process of meat production on a global scale.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Located on land projecting into the Uruguay River west of Fray Bentos town, the industrial complex is marked by the enormous cold storage building and tall brick, boiler chimney which punctuate a range of saw-toothed roofs. Illustrating the whole process of meat sourcing, processing, packing and dispatch, the site includes buildings and equipment of the Liebig Extract of Meat Company which exported meat extract and corned beef to the European market from 1865 and the Anglo Meat Packing Plant which exported frozen meat from 1924. Here German research and technology combined with English enterprise to provide food for a global market including to the armies of two World Wars in the 20th century. Workers’ housing and social institutions which accommodated and supported the cosmopolitan workers’ community continue in use today.

Criterion (ii): Fray Bentos Industrial Landscape is evidence of the interchange of human values between European society and the South American population of the 19th and 20th century which effected social, cultural and economic changes in both places during that period. This was due the interchange on developments in technology which enabled the production and export of canned and frozen meat on a global scale and to the immigrant workers who arrived from more than 55 nations.

Criterion (iv): The ensemble of cattle pasture and handling facilities, industrial buildings, mechanical facilities, port facilities, residential fabric and green areas linking the river and agricultural areas to the city of Fray Bentos Industrial Landscape stands out as an example of early 20th century industrial development.

Integrity

The property includes all elements related to the history of the site and the period of its operation and is of adequate size to ensure the complete representation of the features and processes which convey the property’s significance. The landscape setting is appropriate in size and views form the river and town are maintained. Some buildings are in need of repair and conservation but the site does not suffer from neglect overall.

Authenticity

The property is authentic in terms of location and setting, materials and substance and use/function in terms of the buildings which form part of the Museum of Industrial Revolution. The archive contains historical documents with technical information providing a source for repairs and restoration. Other buildings have been adapted for new uses and workers’ housing has been upgraded to provide more modern accommodation for families now living there, many of whom have a connection with the property through family members who worked there. Authenticity is vulnerable to proposed new development within the property including new uses for buildings and sites as well as new construction.

Protection and management requirements

The property is protected as a National Historic Landmark under the Heritage Act No. 14.040, August 1971 as amended in 2008 and the Regulatory Decree 536/72. Objects owned by government agencies and non-state corporations are protected under Act No. 17.473, 9 May 2002. The Acts are administered by the National Cultural Heritage Commission.

The property has been managed at site level by the Anglo Management Committee since 2008 with input from representatives of the Ministry of Culture and Educational Affairs; Ministry of Housing, Land Use Planning and Environment and the Municipality of Rio Negro. This body is responsible for the implementation of the Property Management Plan 2012-2015, which was approved by the National Cultural Heritage commission in January 2014.
Activities 1
Cultural Landscapes
News  2
World Heritage Committee announces 2016 meeting in Istanbul, 24 new sites inscribed in Bonn
8 July 2015
Sites in Japan, Turkey, Mexico, Uruguay inscribed on UNESCO’s World Heritage List, extension of Spanish site approved
5 July 2015
Uruguay
Date of Inscription: 2015
Criteria: (ii)(iv)
Property : 273.8 ha

Buffer zone: 2,127.7 ha
Dossier: 1464
S33 7 4 W58 19 54
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2017
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026