World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Melka Kunture and Balchit: Archaeological and ...
Melka Kunture and Balchit: Archaeological and Palaeontological Sites in the Highland Area of Ethiopia
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Melka Kunture and Balchit: Archaeological and Palaeontological Sites in the Highland Area of Ethiopia

Located in the Upper Awash Valley in Ethiopia, the serial property is a cluster of prehistoric sites that preserve archaeological and palaeontological records – including footprints – that testify to the area’s occupation by the hominin groups from two million years ago. The sites, situated about 2,000 to 2,200 metres above sea level, yielded Homo erectus, Homo heidelbergensis and archaic Homo sapiens fossils, documented in well-dated strata in association with various tools made from volcanic rocks. The cultural sequence includes four consecutive phases of the Oldowan, Acheulean, Middle Stone Age and Late Stone Age techno-complexes. Fragments of palaeo-landscapes, preserved buried under volcanic and sedimentary deposits with fossil fauna and flora, allow reconstruction of the high-mountain ecosystem of the Ethiopian Highlands during the Pleistocene. Conclusions can thus be drawn on the adaptation of hominin groups to the challenges and climatic conditions of high altitudes.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The cluster of Pleistocene archaeological and palaeontological sites of Melka Kunture and Balchit lies along the upper course of the Awash River, on the Ethiopian Highlands, at an altitude of about 2,000 to 2,200 metres above the sea level. With a relatively continuous stratigraphic sequence formed by the accumulation of fluvial/alluvial and volcano-derived deposits interposed with tuff, the property preserves an exceptionally long cultural sequence consisting of four consecutive phases of the Oldowan, Acheulean, Middle Stone Age and Late Stone Age techno-complexes, documented in a variety of archaeological contexts, testifying to the occupation of the area by hominin groups from two million years ago. Fragments of palaeo-landscapes preserved buried under the volcanic and sedimentary deposits with fossil fauna and flora allow to reconstruct the high-mountain ecosystem of the Ethiopian Highlands during the Pleistocene and draw conclusions on the adaptation of hominins to the challenges and climatic conditions of high altitudes. The presence of Homo erectus, Homo heidelbergensis and archaic Homo sapiens fossils, found in association with well-dated archaeological material, throws light on the development of skills and cognitive capacities in the early hominin groups. Rich concentration of varied lithic assemblages made from volcanic rocks with different knapping techniques, and evidence of high-quality of standardised obsidian tools, suggest a level of planning and innovation. Evidence of the centuries-long tradition of procurement and use of obsidian starting with the Oldowan industry makes the property the earliest known example of obsidian utilisation and an outstanding witness of continuity of exploitation of this raw material.

The component parts together contribute to the understanding of human evolution, allowing to revisit the existing theories related to the transitions between the techno-industries, and suggesting fundamental steps in the development of human intelligence and adaptation skills. They also provide valuable information on the sedimentary history of the area and allow to determine the chronology of cultural horizons of the Pleistocene epoch based on the dating of volcanic tuffs preserved in the Melka Kunture succession.

Criterion (iii): The ensemble of Pleistocene archaeological and palaeontological sites of Melka Kunture and Balchit is the only known place in the world to have preserved in a single area an exceptionally long cultural sequence consisting of four consecutive phases of Oldowan, Acheulean, Middle Stone Age and Late Stone Age techno-complexes. Hominin fossils of Homo erectus, Homo heidelbergensis and archaic Homo sapiens discovered in well-dated archaeological layers with Oldowan, Acheulean and Middle Stone Age industries, paired with the evidence of varying use of different rocks through time, contribute to the understanding of human evolution, development of cognitive capacities in early hominin groups, and their adaptation to the environment by employing different strategies of raw material procurement and use.

Criterion (iv): Fragments of Quaternary fossil landscapes, preserved buried under volcanic tuffs and sedimentary deposits of the ensemble of Pleistocene archaeological and palaeontological sites of Melka Kunture and Balchit, allow to reconstruct the palaeo-environment and palaeo-climate of the Ethiopian Highlands during the Pleistocene epoch and understand better the lifestyle of hominin groups occupying the area. Hominin remains documented within the property provide one of the earliest evidence of human occupation of high altitudes and their adaptation to the high-mountain ecosystem, different from the dry savannas of lower elevations, which marks a significant stage in human history. The volcanic material that buried the palaeo-landscapes has scientific value as it allows to date and establish the chronology of the cultural horizons.

Criterion (v): The cluster of Pleistocene archaeological and palaeontological sites of Melka Kunture and Balchit testifies in an exceptional way to the consistent exploitation of obsidian as a raw material and its extensive use for tool production that starts with the Oldowan industry. It is the earliest known example of obsidian utilisation, and the only known place in the world that holds an uninterrupted record of systematic procurement of this volcanic glass and its knapping since two million years ago. High-quality and quantity of standardised obsidian tools found in Acheulean contexts suggests possible introduction of specialised production sites.

Integrity

All component parts contribute substantially to the Outstanding Universal Value, providing complementary evidence on the evolution and activity of hominin groups, their natural environment and the sedimentary history of the Upper Awash River basin over the span of two million years. The archaeological and palaeontological deposits and the deep stratigraphy are well-preserved throughout the property. The excavated sections have been backfilled, except for one section which has been left open for public display. Artefacts and hominin remains are stored and exhibited in the Ethiopian National Museum in Addis Ababa and the site museum. The component parts suffer from erosion to a small extent, due mainly to seasonal overflows of the Awash River. Intactness of the deposits in some areas is threatened by activities related to sand quarrying. The setting of the property has been largely preserved and the areas with future research potential have been included within the buffer zones to protect them from potential encroachment related to development of the area or agricultural practices.

Authenticity

The area has been excavated to a small degree and the context of the sites remains intact. The cultural sequence and the geologic record – with volcanic tuffs that allow to determine the chronology of cultural horizons – are preserved undisturbed. The immediate setting of the property has not been compromised but the expansion of settlements and the related development of infrastructure need to be monitored at some of the component parts.

Protection and management requirements

The property is a registered national heritage, owned by the state while people receive usufruct rights to plots of land. All component parts and the buffer zones are protected through the Regulation No. 159/2013. At the highest level, the property is managed by the Oromia Culture and Tourism Bureau, in collaboration with the Authority for Research and Conservation of Cultural Heritage (ARCCH). At the site level, the Administration and Preservation Office is responsible for the day-to-day administration of the property and coordination of stakeholder relations. Since the property falls under two different Woredas and Administrative Zones, the respective Culture and Tourism offices of the Oromia Culture and Tourism Bureau serve as a bridge between the site administration and other government institutions at higher levels, at the district and administrative zone levels.

The management plan (2022-2027) has been developed through a consultative process and will be implemented collaboratively by the Oromia Culture and Tourism Bureau, and ARCCH. Local communities will be actively engaged in the management and development of the property to ensure conflict-free protection of the archaeological and palaeontological sites.  Key challenges in the short term will be to put in place adequate procedures and practical mechanisms to guarantee effective protection and management of the property within the existing legal framework, to strengthen human capacity, and to ensure sustainability of funds for the maintenance of the property.

News  2
A major step forward in the protection of African World Heritage
7 August 2024
UNESCO World Heritage: 24 new sites inscribed
1 August 2024
Ethiopia
Date of Inscription: 2024
Criteria: (iii)(iv)(v)
Dossier: 13rev
Serial: yes

Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026