World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Old Town of Segovia and its Aqueduct
Old Town of Segovia and its Aqueduct
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Old Town of Segovia and its Aqueduct

The Roman aqueduct of Segovia, probably built c. A.D. 50, is remarkably well preserved. This impressive construction, with its two tiers of arches, forms part of the setting of the magnificent historic city of Segovia. Other important monuments include the Alcázar, begun around the 11th century, and the 16th-century Gothic cathedral.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis 

The Old Town of Segovia is located in the centre of Spain, in the Autonomous Community of Castile and León. The centre is crowded together on the rocky bluff delineated by the confluence of the Eresma and Clamores rivers.

Segovia is symbolic of a complex, historical reality. Its neighbourhoods, streets, and houses are laid out in accordance with a social structure in which hierarchy was organized and dominated by belonging to one of the different cultural communities. Moors, Christians, and Jews coexisted for a long period of time in the medieval city and worked together during the 16th century manufacturing boom.  The evidence of this cultural process can be seen in the large number of outstanding monuments in the city, among which, the Roman Aqueduct stands out. Other important monuments can be found in the property: the Alcázar, begun around the 11th century; several Romanesque churches; noble palaces from 15th and 16th centuries; the 16th-century Gothic cathedral, the last to be built in Spain in this style; and the Segovia Mint, the oldest industrial building still existing in Spain.

The Roman Aqueduct of Segovia, probably built c. 50 BC, is remarkably well preserved. This impressive construction, with its two tiers of arches, forms part of the magnificent setting of the historic city of Segovia. It is an enormous construction of masonry, 813 m in length, consisting of four straight segments and two superimposed arcades borne by 128 pillars. At the lowest point of the valley, the Aqueduct stands at a height of 28.5 m above ground.

The 221 colossal pillars bear witness to the magnitude of the Aquae Atilianae in the province of Zaragoza while in other parts of Spain, only remnants of the Roman aqueducts of Sevilla, Toledo, and Calahorra have survived. The impressive monuments that survive in Mérida, Tarragona, and Segovia illustrate the political determination, which following the steps of the victorious armies, greatly increased the number of aqueducts which Frontinus described as 'the most solemn testimony of the Empire.'

The Aqueduct of Segovia is the best known of these civil engineering feats due to its monumentality, its excellent state of conservation, and in particular, its stunning location in relation to the urban site. The Aqueduct is the symbol of the city and can in no way be separated from Segovia as a whole. 

Criterion (i): Segovia comprises an array of monuments, which in terms of beauty and exemplary historical significance, are truly outstanding, with the Aqueduct, the Alcázar, and the Cathedral among its major structures.

Criterion (iii): The Old Town of Segovia illustrates a complex, historical reality through its urban layout and architectural developments. It is a prime example of the coexistence of different, cultural communities throughout time.

Criterion (iv): Segovia provides an outstanding testimony of a Western city based on a number of diverse, cultural traditions. All the component parts of the built environment, from domestic architecture to the great religious and military structures, can be found here in a broad range of construction techniques and styles that reflect this unique, cultural diversity. 

Integrity

The inscribed property has an area of 134 ha that contains all the necessary features to express its Outstanding Universal Value. The centre of the historic city, with its large number of remarkable monuments, including the Roman Aqueduct and the more humble domestic architecture, has been maintained. All of the attributes of the property show the complex and fascinating history of the city, particularly the coexistence of different religions and cultures, the mark of which can be admired in a wide range of architectural styles. Their status as classified monuments within the Spanish government has helped to preserve them properly, and any intervention must be aimed at maintaining and safeguarding their characteristics and significance. 

Authenticity

Due to its early legal protection, the property has maintained the features of authenticity, particularly in terms of location, form, and design. This is applicable not only to the highlighted monuments, such as the Roman Aqueduct, but also to other monuments and architectural ensembles in the city. The traces of the medieval city, with historic areas like the Jewish Quarter, can be seen in the current layout of the town with its narrow streets, the type of paving, and the decorated rendering of the buildings, among other features.

As this urban ensemble is in continuous development, the property has been affected by modifications, but has always been under strict administrative controls, both from the municipality and the regional government, so as to not negatively impact the attributes that convey Outstanding Universal Value of the property. 

Protection and management requirements

The city of Segovia was registered as a “Historic Site” under Spanish law in 1941. Furthermore, a large number of monuments are also registered as Property of Cultural Interest (BIC, Bien de Interés Cultural), the highest level of protection according to the current cultural heritage laws in Spain. Therefore, any intervention requests for the property or the monuments, including archaeological investigation, entails prior administrative authorization, according to the current cultural heritage laws (Law 12/2002, 11July, of Cultural Heritage of Castile and León, Decree 37/2007, 19 April, that approves the Rules for the Protection of Cultural Heritage in Castile and León, Law 16/1985, 25 June, of Spanish Historic Heritage). In addition, all the projects concerning the property must be previously approved by the Commission for Cultural Heritage of Segovia.

Given its World Heritage status, several projects have been drawn up to maintain and promote its Outstanding Universal Value, including international seminars about the conservation of the Aqueduct. The City Council has also undertaken important actions aiming at protecting, promoting, and managing the city, as well as developed an Integrated Plan of Accessibility and Refurbishment for different areas of the city (Aqueduct, Canonjías, Jewish Quarter, etc.). The City Council has a specific Department of Cultural Heritage that is in charge of municipal policies aiming at safeguarding the cultural significance of the site, and is also entrusted with other policies related to heritage, such as tourism or accessibility. Implementing these policies in a coordinated way remains a challenge, and the City Council faces the constant, common problems often found in other historic cities like Segovia (increasing demand of public facilities, residential development, tourist facilities, refurbishment of degraded areas, etc.)

A General Plan guides the overall town planning, which is supplemented by a Special Urban Plan for Protection of the Historic Areas. Regulations to safeguard the Historic Site have been established through a new Urban Plan developed by the City Council. The definition of a buffer zone will be crucial to also protect views to and from the property to maintain the visual characteristics of the property, and also to protect the loop of the aqueduct. The Special Plan for the Historical Areas of Segovia will need to take this protection of the buffer zone into account and enforce appropriate regulations.

Links
Segovia - World Heritage (in Spanish)

Segovia Town Hall (in Spanish)

Ministry of Culture and Sports (in Spanish)

Tourism in Segovia

 View photos from OUR PLACE the World Heritage collection

Segovia - World Heritage Cities of Spain

Activities 1
World Heritage Cities Programme
News  1
Google and UNESCO announce alliance to provide virtual visits of several World Heritage sites
3 December 2009
Events  2
5th Edition of The Heritage Night
17 Sep 2022 - 17 Sep 2022
Second Meeting of European World Heritage Associations
20 Oct 2016 - 21 Oct 2016
Media
play_arrow NHK World Heritage 100 Series
play_arrow Old Town of Segovia and its Aqueduct (UNESCO/NHK)
Spain
Date of Inscription: 1985
Minor boundary modification inscribed year: 2015
Criteria: (i)(iii)(iv)
Property : 134.28 ha

Buffer zone: 401.44 ha
Dossier: 311bis
Province of Segovia, Autonomous Community of Castile-Leon
N40 56 54.5 W4 7 0.3
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2006 1997
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026