World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Paphos
Paphos
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Assistance
Paphos

Paphos has been inhabited since the Neolithic period. It was a centre of the cult of Aphrodite and of pre-Hellenic fertility deities. Aphrodite's legendary birthplace was on this island, where her temple was erected by the Myceneans in the 12th century B.C. The remains of villas, palaces, theatres, fortresses and tombs mean that the site is of exceptional architectural and historic value. The mosaics of Nea Paphos are among the most beautiful in the world.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Paphos, situated in the District of Paphos in western Cyprus, is a serial archaeological property consisting of three components at two sites: the town of Kato Paphos (Site I), and the village of Kouklia (Site II). Kato Paphos includes the remains of ancient Nea Paphos (Aphrodite’s Sacred City) and of the Kato Paphos necropolis known as Tafoi ton Vasileon (“Tombs of the Kings”), further to the north. The village of Kouklia includes the remains of the Temple of Aphrodite (Aphrodite’s Sanctuary) and Palaepaphos (Old Paphos). Because of their great antiquity, and because they are closely and directly related to the cult and legend of Aphrodite (Venus), who under the influence of Homeric poetry became the ideal of beauty and love, inspiring writers, poets, and artists throughout human history, these two sites can indeed be considered to be of outstanding universal value.

Paphos, which has been inhabited since the Neolithic period, was a centre of the cult of Aphrodite and of pre-Hellenic fertility deities. Aphrodite’s legendary birthplace was on the island of Cyprus, where her temple was erected by the Myceneans in the 12th century BC and continued to be used until the Roman period. The site is a vast archaeological area, with remains of villas, palaces, theatres, fortresses and tombs. These illustrate Paphos’ exceptional architectural and historic value and contribute extensively to our understanding of ancient architecture, ways of life, and thinking. The villas are richly adorned with mosaic floors that are among the most beautiful in the world. These mosaics constitute an illuminated album of ancient Greek mythology, with representations of Greek gods, goddesses and heroes, as well as activities of everyday life.

Criterion (iii): Cyprus was a place of worship of pre-Hellenic fertility deities since the Neolithic period (6th millennium BC). Many of the archaeological remains are of great antiquity; the Temple of Aphrodite itself dates from the 12th century BC, and bears witness to one of the oldest Mycenaean settlements. The mosaics of Nea Paphos are extremely rare and are considered amongst the finest specimens in the world; they cover the Hellenistic period to the Byzantine period. One of the keys to our knowledge of ancient architecture, the architectural remains of the villas, palaces, fortresses, and rock-hewn peristyle tombs of Paphos are of exceptional historical value.

Criterion (vi): The religious and cultural importance of the cult of Venus, a local fertility goddess of Paphos that became widely recognized and celebrated as a symbol of love and beauty, contributes to the Outstanding Universal Value of this property.

Integrity

All the elements necessary to express the Outstanding Universal Value of Paphos are located within the boundaries of the 291 ha serial property, including the remains of villas, palaces, theatres, fortresses, and the rock-hewn necropolis known as the Tomb of the Kings, as well as mosaics. There is no buffer zone, though the national Antiquities Law provides for the establishment of “Controlled Areas” in the vicinity of the archaeological sites. The property does not suffer unduly from adverse effects of development and/or neglect. Development pressures in the surroundings of the property that threaten to alter the landscape and setting are being dealt with through cooperation with other governmental departments and the local authorities.

The integrity of the property is related to the actions taken by the State Party to preserve the original condition of the ruins. Conservation work undertaken is oriented towards ensuring the structural safety of the ruins, while respecting the original material and its aesthetic value, without interfering with the integrity of the property. Special care is taken in the conservation of the mosaic floors, which benefited from a conservation project with the Getty Conservation Institute that ended in 2004. An extensive conservation programme for the mosaic floors was launched in 2011 by the Department of Antiquities to ensure their preservation. The aim is to continue efforts towards the scientific preservation of the archaeological remains and to further oppose development pressures in the environs of the property. 

Authenticity

Paphos is authentic in terms of its locations and settings, forms and designs, as well as materials and substances. The key elements of the property, such as the archaeological remains associated with the cult of Aphrodite, the rare mosaics, and the remains of civil, military, and funerary architecture, retain a high degree of authenticity with regard to the built fabric.

Protection and management requirements

Paphos is protected and managed according to the provisions of the highly effective national Antiquities Law and the international treaties signed by the Republic of Cyprus. In accordance with the Antiquities Law, Ancient Monuments are categorized as being of the First Schedule (governmental ownership) or of the Second Schedule (private ownership). Paphos (both the town of Kato Paphos and the village of Kouklia) is for the most part under government ownership, due to the policy by the Department of Antiquities to gradually acquire land within the sites and their vicinity. Listed Ancient Monuments of the Second Schedule are gradually being acquired according to the provisions of Section 8 of the Antiquities Law. Furthermore, the Law provides for the establishment of “Controlled Areas” within the vicinity around the sites to control the height and architectural style of any proposed building; such areas are in place for both the town of Kato Paphos and the village of Kouklia. Paphos was given “enhanced protection” status in November 2010 by UNESCO’s Committee for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict.

Management of the property is under the direct supervision of the Curator of Ancient Monuments and the Director of the Department of Antiquities. The District Archaeological Officer of Paphos is responsible for supervising the property, under the direction of the Curator of Ancient Monuments. The property has sufficient funding, which is provided by the Department of Antiquities from the yearly government budget. A Master Plan for Kato Paphos (Site I) was implemented from 1991 onwards. The second phase of this Master Plan, concerning the creation of shelters for the mosaic floors, is in progress. A Master Plan for Palaepaphos (Site II) has also been prepared and is under progressive implementation. The creation of a management plan for Paphos that addresses the conservation, promotion, and preservation needs of the property is one of the objectives set by the Department of Antiquities for all listed Cypriot World Heritage properties.

Sustaining the Outstanding Universal Value of the property over time will require completing, approving, and implementing a management plan for Paphos, aiming at the conservation, promotion, and preservation of the property’s unique values for future generations. It will also reinforce efforts undertaken within the framework of the national legislation to minimise dangers of encroachment and the erection of inappropriate buildings in this favoured tourist area.

Links
World Heritage Journeys web site

 View photos from OUR PLACE the World Heritage collection

World Heritage Sites of Cyprus

Activities 1
World Heritage Cities Programme
News  2
UNESCO launches new travel platform ‘World Heritage Journeys’ to promote sustainable tourism in the EU
13 September 2018
Four World Heritage sites in Cyprus and Italy granted “enhanced protection” in the event of armed conflict
29 November 2010
Events  1
VSMM 2008: Digital Heritage 2.0
20 Oct 2008 - 26 Oct 2008
Cyprus
Date of Inscription: 1980
Criteria: (iii)(vi)
Property : 162.0171 ha

Dossier: 79
Serial: yes

Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2004
Protections
by other conservation instruments

1 protection / 1 element

Second Protocol to the 1954 Hague Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict (1 element)

Paphos

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026