World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
The Persian Caravanserai
The Persian Caravanserai
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
The Persian Caravanserai
Caravanserais were roadside inns, providing shelter, food and water for caravans, pilgrims and other travellers. The routes and the locations of the caravanserais were determined by the presence of water, geographical conditions and security concerns. The fifty-four caravanserais of the property are only a small percentage of the numerous caravanserais built along the ancient roads of Iran. They are considered to be the most influential and valuable examples of the caravanserais of Iran, revealing a wide range of architectural styles, adaptation to climatic conditions, and construction materials, spread across thousands of kilometres and built over many centuries. Together, they showcase the evolution and network of caravanserais in Iran, in different historical stages.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Caravanserais were roadside inns located along ancient trade and pilgrimage routes, providing shelter, food, and water for caravans, pilgrims and other travellers. The serial property comprises fifty-four caravanserais considered to be the most famous, influential, and valuable examples of this type of building in Iran. Together, they showcase the evolution and diversity of caravanserais in Iran, in different historical stages. They exemplify a wide range of architectural styles, adaptation to climatic conditions (especially desert areas) and use of construction materials.

The development and evolution of the property from the Achaemenid period (559-330 BC) to the Qajar period (1794-1925) shows the stability and importance of the caravanserais in Iranian history. The Persian Caravanserai bears testimony to travel traditions before the industrial age and the development of modern roads and railways. In addition to offering multiple services to travellers, caravanserais also had a social function as they were places where people from different ethnicities, languages and religions gathered, albeit for short periods of time. For centuries, they contributed to the exchange of human values, ideas, and knowledge.

Criterion (ii): The fifty-four component parts of the Persian Caravanserai serial property reflect the diversity and variety of caravanserais built along the ancient roads of Iran for over two millennia. Caravanserais were the meeting point for travellers, merchants, and many other people from different cultures, facilitating the exchange of human values.

Criterion (iii): The Persian Caravanserai bears testimony to the continuity of the Persian tradition of building caravanserais from the 5th century BC to the early years of the 20th century. The network of caravanserais and its related infrastructures in different time periods were of significant importance for the expansion of trading among different areas of the known world as well as the growth of economic and cultural interactions among various peoples.

Integrity

The fifty-four caravanserais are spread over a wide network of historical roads, across thousands of kilometres, and in very different climate and geographical locations. Some of the component parts constitute archaeological sites whereas others retain their original function as temporary accommodation and resting places for travellers.

The conditions of integrity of the Persian Caravanserai are met as the state of conservation of most component parts is adequate, however regular maintenance and conservation works are needed, particular for caravanserais currently not in use and exposed to the effects of weathering in harsh climatic conditions. Ancillary buildings located outside of the caravanserais but important for their functioning – such as water cisterns, tombs and kilns – contribute to the integrity of the property, must be equally conserved and would benefit to be included in the boundaries of the property along with the immediate setting of these caravanserais.

The location and setting of each caravanserai were determinant for its architectural design, for example in response to climatic conditions, availability of water or defence needs. Controlling development in their immediate setting is therefore a continued priority for the conservation and management of the property.

Authenticity

The Persian Caravanserai meets the conditions of authenticity in terms of form and design, materials and substance and location and setting. Some of the caravanserais still keep their historical function as resting places for pilgrims and traders. Other have been adapted to new functions and have had different degrees of alterations made to their form and design, which overall have not compromised their authenticity. The caravanserais that are preserved as archaeological sites enjoy higher degrees of authenticity.

Past reconstructions and interventions in some of the caravanserais were not based on complete and detailed documentation but were undertaken using traditional materials and building techniques, making it difficult to distinguish between old and new fabric.

Recent and ongoing conservation interventions follow good conservation practices with regards to differentiating new materials and substance from original ones (mostly stone and bricks), following traditional building methods as well as relying on trusted documentation.

Protection and management requirements

All component parts of The Persian Caravanserai property have been inscribed on the National Cultural Heritage List and are protected by different legislative instruments. Buffer zones are subject to regulations that prohibit any damaging or disturbing activity such as polluting industrial activities or garbage accumulation. By law, the Iranian Ministry of Cultural Heritage, Tourism and Handicrafts (IMCHTH) is the responsible authority for the conservation of all artistic, historical and cultural monuments and sites within the country. For the purpose of managing the property, the IMCHTH has established the Persian Caravanserai Cultural Heritage Base, under the Deputy of Cultural Heritage.

The work of the Persian Caravanserai Base is supported by two committees: the Technical Committee and the Steering Committee – and by local technical offices. The Technical Committee is a consultant committee which provides advice on technical details such as interventions or use of materials. It consists of experienced specialists from various fields including restoration and conservation, tourism, handicrafts, anthropology, archaeology, road engineering, and architecture. The Steering Committee is composed of representatives of different institutions involved in the management of the property.

All caravanserais included in the property have individual restoration plans. In addition, caravanserais located within cities and villages are taken into consideration in urban and rural master plans. The provisions included in those plans in relation to the caravanserais and their buffer zones must be approved by the IMCHTH. Local communities are involved in the management of the caravanserais that are located in cities or within the vicinity of villages.

Strengthening the management plan for the property as a whole to include clear management objectives, details on the governance arrangements, information on the coordination of the actions of the different actors, a clear definition of the decision-making processes, the inclusion of disaster risk-preparedness, and a comprehensive interpretation and tourism strategies would enhance the conservation and management of the property.

Iran (Islamic Republic of)
Date of Inscription: 2023
Criteria: (ii)(iii)
Property : 30.34 ha

Buffer zone: 3,294.58 ha
Dossier: 1668
Serial: yes

Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2025
Protections
by other conservation instruments

1 protection / 2 elements

Biosphere Reserves (2 elements)

Kavir
Touran

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026