World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Cerrado Protected Areas: Chapada dos ...
Cerrado Protected Areas: Chapada dos Veadeiros and Emas National Parks
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Cerrado Protected Areas: Chapada dos Veadeiros and Emas National Parks

The two sites included in the designation contain flora and fauna and key habitats that characterize the Cerrado – one of the world’s oldest and most diverse tropical ecosystems. For millennia, these sites have served as refuge for several species during periods of climate change and will be vital for maintaining the biodiversity of the Cerrado region during future climate fluctuations.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief description

The site of the Cerrado Protected Areas includes the Chapada dos Veadeiros and Emas National Parks located in the Brazilian central plateau in the State of Goias. Both parks help protect the Cerrado biome, one of the oldest and most diverse ecosystems in the world.  For millennia, these sites have served as refuge for many rare and endemic species of fauna and flora, including during periods of climatic fluctuations. Both sites remain essential for maintaining the biodiversity in the Cerrado, especially in any future climate change scenario.

The flora of the Cerrado is rich. It includes between 350 and 400 species of vascular plants per hectare, including many endemic plants. The property also contains populations of large mammals, including the giant anteater, giant armadillo, maned wolf, jaguar and pampas deer, but also the rhea, the largest bird of South America. The site is also extremely important in maintaining the hydrological regime as, due to its geological features and soils, it is proving to be a key area for aquifer recharge and the alimentation of several watercourses that supply power to the Amazon basin and the Pantanal, in the basin of La Plata.

Criterion (ix): The current protected areas of the site played a key role for thousands of years in maintaining the biodiversity of the Cerrado ecoregion. Because of their central position and their altitudinal variation, they served as relatively stable refuges for species during climate changes that displaced the Cerrado along a north-south or east-west axis. This role of refuge for species continues. The climate marked by the two well-defined seasons (dry and wet), the recurrence of fires and the high concentration of aluminum, as well as the extremely acid and nutrient-deprived soil, have resulted in unique progressive adaptations in the flora and fauna.

Criterion (x): The site contains samples of all the key habitats that characterize the Cerrado ecoregion - one of the oldest tropical ecosystems of the Earth. It hosts more than 60% of all plant species and almost 80% of all vertebrate species observed in the Cerrado. All the endangered great mammals of the Cerrado are present, with the exception of the giant otter. In addition, the site is home to many rare small mammals and endemic birds of the Cerrado. Science continues to discover new species in this site.

Integrity

All important areas essential to the long-term survival of key species, particularly the large predators, are found in the Chapada dos Veadeiros National Park (also protected by the "Environmental Protection Area of Pouso Alto” buffer zone) and in the Emas National Park. Although the Emas Park is almost completely surrounded by agricultural zones, its management aims to overcome the outside impacts, especially fires (although agricultural encroachment remains a problem). Research carried out in this site revealed that the large predators use it to feed and reproduce, which indicates that its dimensions are adequate to meet the biological needs of these species. Projects for the creation of biological corridors are under development to prevent these parks, especially Emas, from becoming islands surrounded by agricultural land.

Protection and management requirements

Both parks are legally registered in the "Integral Protection Group" within the "National System of Conservation Units" of Brazil, equivalent to an IUCN Category II Protected Area. This allows only the indirect use of their natural resources. The management of these areas is ensured by the Chico Mendes Institute for Biodiversity Conservation (ICMBio), an independent federal agency under the Ministry of Environment and responsible for the protection of the Brazilian natural heritage.

In the 1990s, the management of the National Parks of Chapada dos Veadeiros and Emas included emergency plans. At the same time, certain actions were developed in order to promote economic alternatives for the surrounding population through partnerships with non-government organizations. In 2004 and 2009, management plans were elaborated respectively for the Emas and Chapada dos Veadeiros National Parks. These plans were developed in collaboration with all stakeholders, including the prefectures, owners, local residents and tourism associations. Their goal was to economically integrate society in the activities of the Park, for sustainable tourism, while discouraging illegal activities in and around its perimeter.

Several projects, including the "Ecological Corridor Cerrado-Pantanal" which aims to improve connectivity and environmental education in the Emas National Park and the "Ecological Corridor Paranã-Pirineus", in the framework of the biosphere reserve of the Cerrado, seek to increase environmental connectivity and support sustainable economic policies, such as ecotourism.

Some key challenges for the management of the property are the fight against fires, agricultural expansion, mining exploitation, plant extraction, hunting and uncontrolled tourism. All these threats have been significantly mitigated for some time. One of the emerging threats to the Emas National Park is the increasing presence of alien herbaceous species.  Upon inscription of the site, only the perimeter of the park was affected, however a monitoring and prevention system against any new invasion has become necessary.

Links
Protectedplanet.net

Activities 1
Rapid Response Facility (RRF)
News  2
Battling Blazes in the Brazilian Cerrado
22 November 2021
World Heritage Committee Inscribes 31 New Sites on the World Heritage List
13 December 2001
Brazil
Date of Inscription: 2001
Minor boundary modification inscribed year: 2019
Criteria: (ix)(x)
Property : 381,430 ha

Dossier: 1035bis
Serial: yes

Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2021 2019 2017 2016 2015 2013 2012 2011
Protections
by other conservation instruments

1 protection / 2 elements

Biosphere Reserves (2 elements)

Cerrado
Pantanal

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026