World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Place Stanislas, Place de la Carrière and ...
Place Stanislas, Place de la Carrière and Place d'Alliance in Nancy
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Place Stanislas, Place de la Carrière and Place d'Alliance in Nancy

Nancy, the temporary residence of a king without a kingdom – Stanislas Leszczynski, later to become Duke of Lorraine – is paradoxically the oldest and most typical example of a modern capital where an enlightened monarch proved to be sensitive to the needs of the public. Built between 1752 and 1756 by a brilliant team led by the architect Héré, this was a carefully conceived project that succeeded in creating a capital that not only enhanced the sovereign's prestige but was also functional.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief Synthesis

Located in the Alsace-Lorraine-Champagne-Ardenne region, the Place Stanislas, Place Carrière and Place d’Alliance in Nancy comprise one of the most harmonious urban landscapes of the Enlightenment, illustrating in an exemplary and masterful way the idea of the royal square as an urban, monumental and central space. Stanislas Leszczynski, father-in-law of Louis XV, king of France, and unhappy pretender to the Polish throne, received in compensation for his abdication the dukedoms of Lorraine for life. He reigned from 1737 to 1766. The town planning works of Nancy are the most beautiful achievements of the patronage of this prince.

Built between 1752 to 1756, the squares of Nancy comprise a monumental urban space the value of which resides in the exemplarity and variety of its design, the subtlety of its scenography, the richness of its architecture and ornamentation.

The ordered façades of Emmanuel Héré, inspired from an original work of Germain Boffrand, the splendid wrought-iron gates that decorate the open corners created by Jean Lamour, the Fountains of Neptune and Amphitrite of the sculptor Guibal, the Fountain of the Place d’Alliance by Paul-Louis Cyfflé, make this ensemble a veritable masterpiece.

The Stanislas, Carrière and d’Alliance Squares constitute the oldest and most characteristic example of a modern capital, where an enlightened monarch proved to be sensitive to the needs of the public. In addition to providing prestigious architecture conceived to exalt the sovereign, with its triumphal arches, statues and fountains, the project favoured the public with its three squares giving access to the town hall, the courts of justice and the “Palais de Fermes” as well as to other public buildings.

Criterion (i): The three squares of Nancy constitute a unique artistic achievement, veritable masterpiece of creative genius.

Criterion (iv): The squares of Nancy bear witness to the oldest and most characteristic example of town planning of the Enlightenment, in a modern city where a enlightened monarch carried out an exceptional programme of public spaces and buildings, illustrating that he was receptive to the needs of the population.

Integrity

The ensemble of the squares has conserved its original ordered plan, architectural and decorative integrity. The only variations are destinations or uses of certain buildings that surround them, while conserving the urban public functions. The squares have retained their unity, their urbanity and their centrality.

Authenticity

Several restoration works have been undertaken, over more than a century, to preserve this property and embellish it by conserving its authenticity, such as the full restoration of the ground area and façades of the Place Stanislas and the restoration of the Tribunal and the Héré Pavillion on the Place de la Carrière.

These maintenance and restoration interventions, based on prior scientific and technical studies, carried out under State control, have enabled the improvement of its state of conservation. The Place Stanislas has recovered its former splendour.

Protection and management requirements

The three squares comprising the property benefit from a series of protection measures under the Heritage Code which have been progressively used and extended since the beginning of the 20th century to 2003. A safeguarded sector was approved in 1996, including the ensemble of the property. A buffer zone of 159 ha was proposed based on the extended boundaries of the remarkable heritage site. On this basis, all work on the components of the property require the authorization of the services of the Ministry of Culture and Communication and are carried out under its authority.

The implementation of the management system and the monitoring of its effectiveness are the responsibility of the Urban Community of Grand Nancy and the Ministry of Culture and Communication.

All the local institutions, in cooperation with the devolved services of the State, contribute to an efficient management of the property, in line with an overall heritage protection and enhancement programme.

Links
Métropole Grand Nancy (in French only)

Ville de Nancy (in French only)

Nancy Patrimoine, Nancy Tourism Office

Activities 1
World Heritage Cities Programme
Media
play_arrow Place Stanislas, Place de la Carrière and Place ... (UNESCO/NHK)
France
Date of Inscription: 1983
Minor boundary modification inscribed year: 2016
Criteria: (i)(iv)
Property : 7 ha

Buffer zone: 159 ha
Dossier: 229bis
Department of Meurthe-et-Moselle, Lorraine Region
N48 41 37 E6 10 60
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026