World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Brimstone Hill Fortress National Park
Brimstone Hill Fortress National Park
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Assistance
Brimstone Hill Fortress National Park

Brimstone Hill Fortress National Park is an outstanding, well-preserved example of 17th- and 18th-century military architecture in a Caribbean context. Designed by the British and built by African slave labour, the fortress is testimony to European colonial expansion, the African slave trade and the emergence of new societies in the Caribbean.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief Synthesis

Brimstone Hill Fortress National Park is a remarkable example of European military engineering dating from the 17th and 18th centuries in a Caribbean context. Located on the Island of St. Christopher (St. Kitts) the country’s largest island, the fortress was built to African slave labour to the exacting standards of the British military to protect the coastline from a sea attack and to provide a safe refuge for the island’s citizens. The engineers, who designed the fort, made use of the natural topography of this double-peaked, steep volcanic hill rising 230 metres.

St. Christopher (St. Kitts) as the first West Indian Island to be colonized by Europeans, specifically the French and English, was the scene of many battles in the struggle for dominance in this region. The earliest use of Brimstone Hill for European military purposes was in 1690 when the British installed a canon to drive out the French. The fortress evolved over the next century and served until 1853 when the British military abandoned it and dismantled many of the buildings.

The principal structures of the fortress are situated on different levels of the upper third of the hill and were constructed in dressed stone (basalt) blocks with a rubble core. Local limestone was used as a decorative element for quoins and for facing round doorways and embrasures. Quarries on the middle and lower slopes of the hill provided much of the stone. The heart of the fortress, Fort George also known as the Citadel, dominates one of the twin peeks. Completed towards the end of the 1700s, this is the earliest surviving example of the “Polygonal System” of fortress design. The entire site covers approximately 15 hectares surrounded by a 1.6 km (1 mile) buffer zone.

Criterion (iii): Brimstone Hill is an outstanding British fortress, built by slave labour to exact standards during a peak period of European colonial expansion in the Caribbean.

Criterion (iv): Because of its strategic layout and construction, Brimstone Hill Fortress is an exceptional and well preserved example of 17th and 18th century British military architecture.

Integrity 

The property is defined by a boundary at base of the hill and as such includes all the various parts of the fortress. Although some buildings were demolished when the site was abandoned by the British in 1853, most of the significant structures dating from the close of the 18th century are intact and visible. Many others are in ruins and are stabilized. The various structures and infrastructure including bastions, barracks, cisterns, retaining walls, roadways and pathways occupying different levels, form part of an integrated complex which illustrate various periods of fortress design and construction and speak to the historical forces which led to its erection. No threats to integrity have been identified.

Authenticity

As a historic military defensive ensemble, the fortress possesses a high level of authenticity. Its strategic siting on a hill to protect the coastline is still evident. Stabilization, restoration and reconstruction projects, carried out since 1965, have involved the discreet use of modern materials, usually in combination with traditional materials. Portland cement has been used for the preparation of mortars, but mixed with lime in recommended proportions. New stone used in reconstructions has been worked according to traditional techniques. Where wood has been used for reconstructions and original timbers are unavailable, care has been taken to apply authentic dimensions and wood-working techniques.

In recent years some concessions have been made to contemporary technologies, in the interest of strength and durability and the overarching imperative of maintaining structural integrity. Interventions are however not apparent, and great attention is paid to authenticity of form and design.

Some original buildings have been reconstructed for tourist use such as the visitor’s centre housed in the reconstructed Commissariat Building (opened in 1992). Other facilities such as the Prince of Wales Bastion Conference and Banquet Centre (1997) have been added to the site.

Protection and management requirements

The National Conservation and Environment Protection Act (1987) of St. Christopher and Nevis declared Brimstone Hill a National Park (hence protected) and gave the Brimstone Hill Fortress National Park Society (BHFNPS) administrative responsibility. The non-governmental BHFNPS is registered as a not-for-profit company with a Council of Management that includes elected representatives of its members and two Government appointees.

The General Manager for the site, appointed by the Council of the BHFNPS, is supported by an Operations Manager, a Park Manager and sixteen other members of staff. A local security firm provides two personnel every day. Experts in conservation and museum development are engaged as needs arise. The BHFNPS enjoys excellent relationships with the Tourism Authority and Ministry, the Hotel and Tourism Association, local tour operators and the St. Christopher National Trust. It also engages with the National Planning Authority, the Public Works Department and the Police.

Protection of the site is further assured by the National Physical Development Act (2000) which also defines a buffer zone of 1.6 km around the base of the hill. Monitoring of the site is an ongoing process. The Management Team, comprising the three managers and administrative supervisor, meets every three months.

A programme of stabilization and restoration is continuous. In fulfilling the responsibility of providing access to the site and information of the its value to all, some structures and spaces have been deployed to facilitate interpretation and provide visitor amenities. Others are used to present or illustrate their original functions. The gradual restoration of various buildings and development have been based on studies and plans such as a 1983  feasibility study supported by the US National Parks Service and two 1989 studies of the restoration of the site and its potential for tourist development.

An overall development plan is augmented from time to time by specific projects as presented by the General Manager and approved by Council, as well as by Recommendations of contracted experts. There are guidelines in place for disaster preparedness and mitigation. A more comprehensive Disaster Plan is contemplated.

There a two significant threats: one social, the other physical. In recent years crime has become a major social problem and Brimstone Hill, like other properties, is vulnerable to attack. Assault upon or injury to visitors could impact disastrously upon the viability of the BHFNPS which depends heavily upon visitation to the site. A strategic plan is being discussed with the local security forces.

Potentially, the most damaging impacts, not only in financial viability, but also on the National Park itself, can result from rock falls and land slippage. Much of the hillside is steep and rocky – including that section from the edge of the citadel overlooking the entrance/exit road below. Sustained heavy rainfall and severe earthquake could send earth or rocks tumbling below. Fortunately, that area is well sheltered and the thick vegetation affords some protection. The long term strategy would be to relocate the road. This would itself affect the integrity of the site. Meanwhile, the area is monitored periodically, especially after sustained heavy rains when, on occasion, the Park is closed to the public.
Links
Brimstone Hill Fortress National Park (Brimstone Hill Fortress National Park Society)

Activities 3
World Heritage Programme for Small Island Developing States (SIDS)
LAC Extra-budgetary Projects
Conserving World Heritage through international partnerships in Brimstone Hill Fortress National Park (Saint Kitts and Nevis)
News  2
Conservation works at Brimstone Hill Fortress National Park completed
24 August 2020
World Heritage Committee Inscribes 48 New Sites on Heritage List
2 December 1999
Events  1
Workshop on the Conservation and Management of Military Architecture-related World Heritage properties in the Caribbean
8 Nov 2016 - 9 Nov 2016
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Date of Inscription: 1999
Criteria: (iii)(iv)
Property : 15.37 ha

Dossier: 910
Parish of St Thomas, St Christopher (St Kitts)
N17 20 48.984 W62 50 13.992
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026