World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Historic District of Old Québec
Historic District of Old Québec
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Historic District of Old Québec

Québec was founded by the French explorer Champlain in the early 17th century. It is the only North American city to have preserved its ramparts, together with the numerous bastions, gates and defensive works which still surround Old Québec. The Upper Town, built on the cliff, has remained the religious and administrative centre, with its churches, convents and other monuments like the Dauphine Redoubt, the Citadel and Château Frontenac. Together with the Lower Town and its ancient districts, it forms an urban ensemble which is one of the best examples of a fortified colonial city.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Founded in the 17th century, Québec City bears eloquent testimony to important stages in the European settlement of the Americas: it was the capital of New France and, after 1760, of the new British colony. The Historic District of Old Québec is an urban area of about 135 hectares. It is made up to two parts: the Upper Town, sitting atop Cap Diamant and defended by fortified ramparts, a citadel, and other defensive works, and the Lower Town, which grew up around Place Royale and the harbour. A well-preserved integrated urban ensemble, the historic district is a remarkable example of a fortified colonial town, and unique north of Mexico.

Criterion (iv) :  A coherent and well-preserved urban ensemble, the Historic District of Old Québec is an exceptional example of a fortified colonial town and by far the most complete north of Mexico.

Criterion (vi) : Québec, the former capital of New France, illustrates one of the major stages in the European settlement of the colonization of the Americas by Europeans.

Integrity

The boundaries of the property encompass all necessary elements to express the outstanding universal value of the Historic District of Old Québec. The historic centre, confined within the current boundaries of the district, is the product of more than four centuries of history. During this period, the fortified town retained the integrity of its essential historical components, particularly from the standpoint of its architecture and urban spatial organization. The property is of adequate size (135 ha) to ensure the complete representation of the features and processes which convey the property’s significance. It has not suffered unduly from adverse effects of development and/or neglect. Over the years, many integration, restoration, rehabilitation, redevelopment and protection and stabilization projects have been carried out. Overall, the projects undertaken in the Historic District of Old Québec have not compromised its integrity.

Authenticity

The Historic District of Old Québec is authentic in terms of its form and design, materials and substance, and location and setting. Since the time of its inscription, the property has changed considerably, particularly with respect to the organization of its historic urban landscape. However, the attributes of the property express its outstanding universal value in a truthful and credible manner.

Protection and management requirements

The Historic District of Old Québec enjoys strong legal protection and the support of all levels of government concerned. An intergovernmental committee, called the Comité de concertation du patrimoine de Québec, was created to coordinate the activities of the different levels of government.

 The area of the Historic District of Old Québec, designated by the provincial authority as the site patrimonial du Vieux-Québec (Old Québec heritage site), is legally protected under the Province of Quebec’s Cultural Property Act, which was adopted in 1963. Its boundaries were established by provincial decree in 1964.

 Since its inclusion on the World Heritage List in 1985, a number of buildings in Old Québec have been added to the list of properties protected under the Cultural Property Act, including the Site historique et archéologique de l’Habitation-Samuel-De Champlain, the Ursuline Convent of Québec and the archaeological reference collection of Place Royale.

 The City of Québec assumes all management responsibilities under its jurisdiction relating to land use and urban planning (zoning bylaws). Moreover, the Règlement sur la politique de consultation publique (bylaw on the public consultation policy) adopted in 2007 stipulates that the Conseil de quartier Vieux-Québec–Cap-Blanc–Colline-Parlementaire (district council) must be consulted before any amendments are made to urban planning and traffic bylaws. Furthermore, any construction, renovation, restoration and signage interventions in Old Québec must have the prior authorization of the Commission d’urbanisme et de conservation of the City of Québec.

 The Quebec government and the City of Québec routinely enter into cultural development agreements making it possible to offer grant programs and major financial contributions to support the restoration of the heritage buildings in Old Québec.

 The federal government, through various departments and Parks Canada, manages a large number of heritage properties. All federal departments, except Crown corporations, are required to comply with the Treasury Board Policy on the Management of Real Property. The Federal Heritage Buildings Review Office (FHBRO) of Parks Canada is mandated to assist them in this task. The Department of National Defence, which is responsible for the Citadel, and Public Works and Government Services Canada play a role in ensuring heritage preservation in the Historic District of Old Québec. As the owner and manager of national historic sites of Canada, Parks Canada invests in the preservation and presentation of its properties, and consequently in the historic district. With nearly 70 persons, places and events of national historic significance under its responsibility, the Agency helps to raise public awareness concerning the significance of the Historic District of Old Québec.

Special attention will be given over the long term to monitoring proposed changes and additions to the property that could, for example, impact its visual integrity and appropriate measures will continue to be implemented to ensure the protection, integrity and authenticity of the property.

Links
Old Quebec, a UNESCO World Heritage site

Attractions in Québec

Fortifications of Québec National Historic Site

Site patrimonial du Vieux-Québec (in French)

Activities 2
World Heritage Cities Programme
Youth Component, 32nd session of the World Heritage Committee (2008)
News  1
UNESCO Director-General expresses regret over destruction by fire of historical Québec landmark
7 April 2008
Media
play_arrow Historic District of Old Québec (UNESCO/NHK)
Canada
Date of Inscription: 1985
Criteria: (iv)(vi)
Property : 135 ha

Dossier: 300
Province of Quebec, City of Quebec
N46 48 34 W71 12 38
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2005 2004 2003 2002 2001 1992 1988 1987
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026