World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Fasil Ghebbi, Gondar Region
Fasil Ghebbi, Gondar Region
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Assistance
Fasil Ghebbi, Gondar Region

In the 16th and 17th centuries, the fortress-city of Fasil Ghebbi was the residence of the Ethiopian emperor Fasilides and his successors. Surrounded by a 900-m-long wall, the city contains palaces, churches, monasteries and unique public and private buildings marked by Hindu and Arab influences, subsequently transformed by the Baroque style brought to Gondar by the Jesuit missionaries.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief Synthesis

Fasil Ghebbi is located in the Amhara National Regional State, in North Gondar Administrative Zone of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia. The serial property consists of eight components. Within the Fasil Ghebbi palace compound are: the Castle of Emperor Fasilidas, the Castle of Emperor Iyasu, the Library of Tzadich Yohannes; the Chancellery of Tzadich Yohannes; the Castle of Emperor David, the Palace of Mentuab and Banqueting Hall of the Emperor Bekaffa. The remaining seven components are located in and around the city of Gondar: the Debre Berhan Selassie (Monastery and church); the Bath of Fasilidas; Kiddush Yohannes; Qusquam (Monastery and Church); Thermal Area; the Sosinios (also known as Maryam Ghemb); the Gorgora (Monastery and Church) and the Palace of Guzara.

Between the thirteenth and seventeenth centuries, Ethiopian rulers moved their royal camps frequently. King Fasil (Fasilidas) settled in Gondar and established it as a permanent capital in 1636. Before its decline in the late eighteenth century, the royal court had developed from a camp into a fortified compound called Fasil Ghebbi, consisting of six major building complexes and other ancillary buildings, surrounded by a wall 900 metres long, with twelve entrances and three bridges.

The fortress city functioned as the centre of the Ethiopian government until 1864. It has some twenty palaces, royal buildings, highly decorated churches, monasteries and unique public and private buildings, transformed by the Baroque style brought to Gondar by the Jesuit missionaries. The main castle has huge towers and looming battlemented walls, resembling a piece of medieval Europe transposed to Ethiopia. Beyond the confines of the city to the north-west by the Qaha River, there is a two-storey pavilion of a bathing palace associated to Emperor Fasilidas. The building is a two-storey battlemented structure situated within and on one side of a rectangular pool of water which was supplied by a canal from the nearby river. The bathing pavilion itself stands on pier arches, and contains several rooms reached by a stone bridge, part of which could be raised for defence. Subsequent rulers, such as Iyasu the Great, continued building, improving the techniques and architectural style and expanded to the hills north-west of the city centre, in the area known as Qusquam.

Fasil Ghebbi and the other remains in Gondar city demonstrate a remarkable interface between internal and external cultures, with cultural elements related to Ethiopian Orthodox Church,Ethiopian Jews and Muslims. This relationship is expressed not only through the architecture of the sites but also through the handicrafts, painting, literature and music that flourished in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.

After its decline in the 19th century, the city of Gondar continued to be an important commercial and transport hub for northwest Ethiopia. Some of the monuments still retain their original spiritual function and the surrounding landscape has significant cultural importance for the local inhabitants.

Criterion (ii): The characteristics of the style of “the Gondarian Period” appeared from the beginning of the 17th century in the capital, Gondar, and significantly influenced the development of Ethiopian architecture for over 200 years. 

Criterion (iii): Fasil Ghebbi, Qusquam and other sites bear an exceptional testimony of the modern era of Ethiopian civilization on the highlands, north of Lake Tana, from the 16th to 18th centuries.  

Integrity

The maps for all the components of the serial property have yet to be prepared and boundaries for the property and buffer zones remain to be delineated. However, several of the component sites, including Fasil Ghebbi, are walled and these provide natural boundaries. These enclosed sites retain all the important attributes that substantiate the Outstanding Universal Value of the property.

Although there are general decay conditions, related to both natural and cultural factors, including lack of maintenance and inadequate past interventions, the components of the property still maintain the necessary conditions of integrity.

A sustained programme for conservation and maintenance is still needed to improve conditions at the overall property and prevent further erosion of the integrity of the property. Additionally, means to address the existing conflicts to balance the conservation of the historic value of the property with the need to improve the traditional liturgical functions have yet to be implemented. Definition and enforcement of regulatory measures for the management of the buffer zones are also needed to preserve the settings of the component parts of the property.

Authenticity

Most of the monuments have preserved their authenticity and remain in an overall good state of conservation. But, inappropriate conservation interventions, carried out between 1930 and 1936, using cement and reinforced concrete caused damage to the original materials and impacted the authenticity of the intervened components. The situation was partially reversed with the restoration works carried out by UNESCO in the 1970s, which replaced the cement and concrete work with the original mixes of lime mortar as well as with subsequent major conservation programmes implemented since 1990. Currently conservation activities at the property seek to reverse the prior impacts so as to maintain the authenticity of the property and focus on the use of original techniques and materials. To prevent future impacts, on the authenticity of the component parts of the property, guidelines and interventions for historic buildings need to be defined and enforced through a sustained conservation and maintenance action plan.

Protection and Management Requirements

Ethiopian Law 1958 (EC) ‘Antiquities Administration’ provides the national legislative background for the protection and preservation of the Ethiopian cultural heritage. No special legal framework is provided to protect Fasil Ghebbi and the other component parts of the property, except the general law, Proclamation No. 209/2000, the revised proclamation for Research and Conservation of Cultural Heritage which also establishes ARCCH as the institution in charge.

ARCCH and the Regional and Zonal Culture, Tourism and Information Bureaus are responsible for the management. Monuments that are used for religious services are under the direct responsibility of the Ethiopian Orthodox Church. Consequently, the management of the property falls at all the three levels - the property, the region, and the central administration, although the day-to-day management is the responsibility of the property at the local level. The Amhara National Regional State is responsible for the recurrent budget that goes to salaries and regular expenditures. The ARCCH is responsible for capital budget that goes for development works such as restoration and preservations. Additional sources of income are derived from tourist fees and these go to Government treasury and the Ethiopian Orthodox Church.

In spite of the existence of these arrangements, a more efficient decision-making structure is needed, with clearly defined roles and responsibilities at the national, regional and local levels, as well as with established mechanisms to promote the engagement of stakeholders in the definition and implementation of actions geared toward the management, conservation, protection and use of the component parts of the property. The revised structure needs to be fully supported by legal provisions to ensure adequate financial and human resources for its efficient and sustained operation, including considerations for multilateral and bilateral cooperation projects.

The management system needs to be clearly set out in an appropriate Management Plan for the serial property, including the definition of policies to bring about the integrated sustainable development and adequate use of the property. The Management Plan needs to be articulated with other planning tools, such as Gondar’s Master Plan, to ensure the conservation of the attributes that sustain the Outstanding Universal Value of the property. Integrated annual plans need also to be implemented in a sustained manner to address the pending needs for inventory, archaeological research, conservation, restoration and interpretation.

Links
UNESCO Courrier, 2008, Number 8

Gondar the Camelot of Ethiopia (Ethiopia Travel)

Activities 1
Gondar - Palaces and castles
News  1
Safeguarding sites for sustainable development in Ethiopia
27 May 2014
Media
play_arrow Fasil Ghebbi, Gondar Region (UNESCO/NHK)
Ethiopia
Date of Inscription: 1979
Criteria: (ii)(iii)
Dossier: 19
Amhara Region
N12 36 28.472 E37 28 10.92
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

1996
Protections
by other conservation instruments

1 protection / 2 elements

2003 Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage (2 elements)

Commemoration feast of the finding of the True Holy Cross of Christ
Ethiopian epiphany

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026