World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Gusuku Sites and Related Properties of the ...
Gusuku Sites and Related Properties of the Kingdom of Ryukyu
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Gusuku Sites and Related Properties of the Kingdom of Ryukyu

Five hundred years of Ryukyuan history (12th-17th century) are represented by this group of sites and monuments. The ruins of the castles, on imposing elevated sites, are evidence for the social structure over much of that period, while the sacred sites provide mute testimony to the rare survival of an ancient form of religion into the modern age. The wide- ranging economic and cultural contacts of the Ryukyu Islands over that period gave rise to a unique culture.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Five hundred years of Ryukyuan history (12th-17th centuries) are represented by this group of sites and monuments.

The nine component parts of the property include the sites and archaeological ruins of two stone monuments, five castles, and two cultural landscapes. They are scattered across Okinawa Island, collectively covering 54.9 ha. The surrounding buffer zone covers a total area of 559.7 ha.

In the 10th-12th centuries, Ryukyuan farming communities (gusuku) began to enclose their villages with simple stone walls for protection. From the 12th century onwards powerful groups known as aji began to emerge. They enlarged the defences of their own settlements, converting them into fortresses for their own households; these adopted the term gusuku to describe these formidable castles.

The castle ruins of the Gusuku sites on imposing elevated locations, are evidence for the social structure over much of that period, while the sacred sites provide mute testimony to the rare survival of an ancient form of religion into the modern age. The wide-ranging economic and cultural contacts of the Ryukyu Islands over that period gave rise to a unique culture.

Criterion (ii): For several centuries the Ryukyu islands served as a centre of economic and cultural interchange between south-east Asia, China, Korea, and Japan, and this is vividly demonstrated by the surviving monuments.

Criterion (iii): The culture of the Ryukyuan Kingdom evolved and flourished in a special political and economic environment, which gave its culture a unique quality.

Criterion (vi): The Ryukyu sacred sites constitute an exceptional example of an indigenous form of nature and ancestor worship that has survived intact into the modern age alongside other established world religions.

Integrity

In Ryukyu there remain more than three hundred Gusuku sites and related assets, of which five Gusuku sites, two related monuments, and two cultural landscapes are included as component parts of the property. Each of the individual component parts of the property is an outstanding representative of the religious beliefs and activities unique to the Ryukyu cultural tradition. Moreover, they are self contained with their own boundaries and buffer zone. They embody not only the geographical and historical characteristics but also the political, economic, and cultural uniqueness of the kingdom’s five hundred years’ regime. They firmly maintain the top-quality wholeness and integrity of the property.

Authenticity

The entire region suffered considerable damage during the Second World War and reconstruction work has taken place on many of the component parts. In Japan the authenticity of the form/design and materials/substance of each part of the property remains at a very high level, as they have been rehabilitated and restored under strict rules for more than one hundred years. Authenticity of location/setting has been maintained in that none of the component parts of the property has been moved from its original location and traces of buildings discovered through archeological excavations have been preserved underground. Extensive measures have been taken to make it possible to differentiate original materials from those used for rehabilitation and restoration, while sufficient care has been taken in the course of choosing materials. In the immediate aftermath of the Second World War, there were some cases of using improper materials, but adequate steps have been taken to replace these with proper materials or to establish clear distinctions between proper and improper materials. All the projects for such procedures are based on detailed surveys and research conducted in advance.

The main hall of Shuri- jô was restored not only on the basis of the surveyed plans and photographs of the actual architecture as it was seen before its destruction by the wartime fire, but also in strict accordance with the findings of the excavation covering a wide area. The exact replica of the lost structure is now a great monument symbolizing the pride of the Ryukyu people.

Shikinaen was restored utilizing similar procedures, the royal villa and garden being recreated with great precision. The underground structural remains were excavated and documented with the utmost care and, when necessary, covered by layers of innocuous earth or sand in order to facilitate differentiation from the structure restored on the original site, thus protecting the existing remains from the work of restoration and rehabilitation while preserving them in good condition.

With respect to craftsmen’s skill, a high level and homogeneous authenticity is properly maintained and their traditional techniques are applied to all projects for restoration, rehabilitation and preservation on an extensive scale.

As described above, the property retains a high level of authenticity in terms of form/design, materials/substance, traditions/techniques, location/setting, function and spirit.

Protection and management requirements

Each component part of the property is designated as an Important Cultural Property, a Historic Site or a Special Place of Scenic Beauty under the 1950 Law for the Protection of Cultural Properties and subjected to strict preservation and management.

The component parts of the property are owned either by the Government of Japan as a nation, a wide range of municipalities or, in some cases, particular private persons. Seifa-Utaki and Zakimi-jô are owned by the respective municipalities where they are located. Nakijin-jô, Katsuren-jô and Nakagusuku-jô are publicly owned for the most part except for a small portion under private ownership. Shuri-jô is a joint property of Japan and Okinawa Prefecture. Tamaudun is jointly owned by Okinawa Prefecture and Naha City. Sonohyan-Utaki-Ishimon and Shikinaen are owned by Naha City. 

The Agency for Cultural Affairs is the agency with management authority responsibilities for preservation, repairs and utilization of those component parts are assumed by the respective owners and administrators. The Government of Japan and Okinawa Prefecture are authorized to provide necessary financial and technical assistance.

The Okinawa Prefecture is in the process of establishing itself as an internationally resort area promoting the unique natural setting and cultural tradition but the various development plans provide for the protection of the property’s component parts. In the buffer zones separating the individual component parts of the property, the height, design, coloring and other factors are also restricted according to the ordinances of the respective municipalities. In addition, almost all such buffer zones are included in the municipalities’ city park, which have been or are about to be put into effect with a view to improving the environments of the component parts and promoting exhibition to the public. Individual management plans are in place for the Nakijin-jô site, Nakagusuku-jô site and Katsuren-jô site, however an overall management plan for the entire inscribed property was lacking. Therefore, the Comprehensive Management Plan was established in 2013 by Okinawa Prefecture in cooperation with the municipal governments concerned, in order to ensure the long term conservation and protection of the property.

Activities 1
World Heritage Cities Programme
News  2
UNESCO expresses solidarity with Japan as fire rips through World Heritage site in Okinawa
31 October 2019
World Heritage Committee Inscribes 61 New Sites on World Heritage List
30 November 2000
Events  1
Shuri-jô site – UNESCO Online Meeting Reviews Important Progress on Recovery from Fire at World Heritage Property
5 June 2020
Media
play_arrow Gusuku Sites and Related Properties of the Kingdom of ... (UNESCO/NHK)
Japan
Date of Inscription: 2000
Criteria: (ii)(iii)(vi)
Property : 54.9 ha

Buffer zone: 559.7 ha
Dossier: 972
Serial: yes

Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2024 2023 2021
Protections
by other conservation instruments

1 protection / 1 element

RAMSAR (1 element)

Manko

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026