World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Selimiye Mosque and its Social Complex
Selimiye Mosque and its Social Complex
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Selimiye Mosque and its Social Complex

The square Mosque with its single great dome and four slender minarets, dominates the skyline of the former Ottoman capital of Edirne. Sinan, the most famous of Ottoman architects in the 16th century, considered the complex, which includes madrasas (Islamic schools), a covered market, clock house, outer courtyard and library, to be his best work. The interior decoration using Iznik tiles from the peak period of their production testifies to an art form that remains unsurpassed in this material. The complex is considered to be the most harmonious expression ever achieved of the Ottoman külliye, a group of buildings constructed around a mosque and managed as a single institution.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Dominating the skyline of Edirne, former capital of the Ottoman Empire, the Selimiye Mosque Complex commissioned by Selim II is the ultimate architectural expression by the architect Sinan of the Ottoman külliye. The imposing mosque stepping up to its single great dome with four soaring slender minarets, spectacular decorated interior space, manuscript library, meticulous craftsmanship, brilliant Iznik tiles and marble courtyard together with its associated educational institutions, outer courtyard and covered bazaar, represent the apogee of an art form and the pious benefaction of 16th century imperial Islam. The architectural composition of the Selimiye Mosque Complex in its dominant location represents the culmination of the great body of work by Sinan, the most outstanding architect of the Ottoman Empire.

Criterion (i): The Selimiye Mosque Complex at Edirne is a masterpiece of the human creative genius of the architect Sinan, the most famous of all Ottoman architects in the 16th century. The single great dome supported by eight pillars has a diameter of 31.5 over a prayer space of 45mx36m, and with its four soaring minarets it dominates the city skyline. The innovative structural design allowed numerous windows creating an extraordinary illuminated interior. The mosque complex was recognised by Sinan himself as his most important architectural work.

Criterion (iv): The Selimiye Mosque with its cupola, spatial concept, architectural and technological ensemble and location crowning the cityscape illustrates a significant stage in human history, the apogee of the Ottoman Empire. The interior decoration using Iznik tiles from the peak period of their production testifies to a great art form never to be excelled in this material. The mosque with its charitable dependencies represents the most harmonious expression ever achieved of the külliye, this most peculiarl Ottoman type of complex.

Integrity

The Selimiye Mosque Complex includes all the attributes of its Outstanding Universal Value within the property boundary, is well-maintained and does not suffer from adverse effects of development. In view of the importance of the dominant setting of the property and its landmark status, it is extremely important that all view corridors continue to be protected.

Authenticity

The Mosque Complex retains its authenticity in terms of form and design, materials and substance. The Mosque and Arasta retain their authenticity in terms of use and function, spirit and feeling. The madrasas have been slightly modified to serve appropriate new uses as museums.

Protection and Management requirements

The property is protected under the National Act on the Preservation of Cultural and Natural Heritage no. 2863 and the Act on Pious Foundations no. 5737, and all works require the approval of the Regional Conservation Council. A Coordination and Supervision Council, constituted by representatives of local and central institutions is being established by the Edirne Municipality to oversee development of the Management Plan for the Selimiye Mosque Complex.  In addition there will be an Advisory Body made up of academics, representatives of NGOs, Chamber of Architects, local and central government and local citizens, which will evaluate the Management Plan and provide suggestions.  The objectives of the Management Plan are directed at ensuring the preservation of the Selimiye Mosque and transfer of its cultural and functional values as a whole to future generations. They cover structural preservation, management of development pressures including urban development within the buffer zone, management of visitors, visitor services, research and training, data management and administration. An Action Plan is included with short term (1-3 years) and long term (over 5 years) items.  Good co-ordination between the various bodies holding responsibility for the Urban Conservation Plan (master plan) for the historical core of Edirne city and the Management Plan for the property, including its conservation, maintenance and visitor management is required to ensure effective management of the property. Documentation of the traditional systems of conservation and management of the property should be part of this.

News  1
Six new sites inscribed on UNESCO’s World Heritage List
27 June 2011
Türkiye
Date of Inscription: 2011
Criteria: (i)(iv)
Property : 2.5 ha

Buffer zone: 37.5 ha
Dossier: 1366
N41 40 40 E26 33 34
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

Protections
by other conservation instruments

1 protection / 1 element

2003 Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage (1 element)

Kırkpınar oil wrestling festival

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026