World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Precolumbian Chiefdom Settlements with Stone ...
Precolumbian Chiefdom Settlements with Stone Spheres of the Diquís
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Assistance
Precolumbian Chiefdom Settlements with Stone Spheres of the Diquís

The property includes four archaeological sites located in the Diquís Delta in southern Costa Rica, which are considered unique examples of the complex social, economic and political systems of the period AD 500–1500. They contain artificial mounds, paved areas, burial sites and, most significantly, a collection of stone spheres, between 0.7 m and 2.57 m in diameter, whose meaning, use and production remain largely a mystery. The spheres are distinctive for their perfection, number, size and density, and placement in original locations. Their preservation from the looting that befell the vast majority of archaeological sites in Costa Rica has been attributed to the thick layers of sediment that kept them buried for centuries.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The serial nomination of four archaeological sites (Finca 6, Batambal, El Silencio and Grijalba-2) located in the Diquís Delta in southern Costa Rica illustrates a collection of unique stone spheres located in chiefdom settlement structures of the Precolumbian period. The four sites represent different settlement structures of chiefdom societies (500-1500 CE) containing artificial mounds, paved areas and burial sites. Special objects of wonder and admiration are the distinctive Diquís stone spheres, which are rare in their perfection of large-sized (up to 2.57m diameter) spherical structures but are also distinct for their number and location in their original positions within residential areas. 

Criterion (iii): The Precolumbian Chiefdom Settlements with Stone Spheres of the Diquís illustrate the physical evidence of the complex political, social and productive structures of the Precolumbian hierarchical societies. The chiefdoms which inhabited the Diquís Delta created hierarchical settlements expressing the division of different levels of power centres, presented by the different serial components. Likewise, the exceptional stone spheres, which continue to leave researchers speculating about the method and tools of their production, represent an exceptional testimony to the artistic traditions and craft capabilities of these Precolumbian societies. 

Integrity

The four property components contribute specific elements which allow for the understanding of the chiefdom settlement structures. Finca 6 is the only site retaining stone spheres in linear arrangements, Batambal is the only chiefdom settlement visible from a far distance, El Silencio contains the largest single stone sphere ever found, and Grijalba-2 site is unique for its use of limestone and its distinctive characteristics as a subordinate centre, as opposed to the Finca 6 site, which was likely a principal centre. All four sites show to differing degrees signs of the negative impact of past agricultural development and looting of archaeological sites. However, the material which remains preserved in situ is significant enough to express the different aspects of Outstanding Universal Value. 

Batambal site is located in close proximity to dwellings and might be negatively impacted by future urban development. In addition, two large development projects, the Diquís Hydroelectric Dam and the Southern International Airport, are currently being discussed. The State Party has committed to undertaking Heritage Impact Assessments (HIA’s) for both projects and given assurances that it will give full consideration and priority to preventing impacts on the Outstanding Universal Value, if either of the projects are to be implemented. 

Authenticity

Previous excavations were limited to test sections and most excavation pits have been reburied following the completion of archaeological recording. As a result, the authenticity of the property with regard to design, material, substance, location and workmanship is satisfactory. A challenge for retaining authenticity of setting is the lack of knowledge of the extent of forest clearance during Precolumbian times, which increases the difficulties in judging sight relations between different structures and landscape elements that contribute to the site’s original setting. 

Finca 6 site also contains a collection of stone spheres confiscated following previous looting, the original locations of which mostly remain unknown. To distinguish those stone spheres which are in their authentic locations from those which have been relocated, it would need to be indicated more clearly that these spheres are no longer presented in their original position. 

Protection and Management requirements

The four components are protected as archaeological sites of public interest according to Law No 6703 on National Archaeological Heritage. This constitutes the highest possible protection for an archaeological site at national level. In addition, the stone sphere settlements proposed in this nomination received legal protection in addition to the highest national level through Presidential Decree 36825-C, which highlights their intended future status as World Heritage Sites. 

The legislation attributes exclusive legal authority over the archaeological sites to the State, represented by the National Archaeological Commission and the National Museum. The legal protection of the four component sites is exemplary and complete. To ensure equally high legal protection of the buffer zones, their integration in the new Regulatory Plan for Osa County needs to be finalized. 

The management of the four site components is overseen and coordinated by the National Museums of Costa Rica. This institution is supported by an Advisory Council for this specific task. The State Party submitted a Management Plan in February 2014, which outlines the vision and strategic objectives for site management for a period of up to 6 years. It is envisaged to complete necessary conservation activities at all four component sites and provide visitor interpretation and presentation as well as facilitate future accessibility to the three sites not yet open to the public, Batambal, Grijalba-2 and El Silencio. 

It seems essential for the success of the management plan implementation that the financial and human resources required for the administration and management of all four site components will be available to the National Museums of Costa Rica, to allow for site managers and guardians to be present on site. For the future protection and conservation of the Precolumbian Chiefdom Settlements with Stone Spheres of the Diquís it also seems essential that Heritage Impact Assessments are undertaken for any proposed developments which might have the potential to negatively impact the property. 

Activities 1
Culture|2030 Indicators National Profile of Costa Rica
News  2
Twenty six new properties added to World Heritage List at Doha meeting
25 June 2014
Six new sites inscribed on World Heritage List
23 June 2014
Events  1
World Heritage Festival in Costa Rica
19 Nov 2022 - 20 Nov 2022
Costa Rica
Date of Inscription: 2014
Criteria: (iii)
Property : 24.73 ha

Buffer zone: 143.423 ha
Dossier: 1453
Serial: yes

Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2025 2023 2021 2018 2016
Protections
by other conservation instruments

1 protection / 1 element

RAMSAR (1 element)

Terraba-Sierpe

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026