World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Schwerin Residence Ensemble
Schwerin Residence Ensemble
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Schwerin Residence Ensemble

Established on the shores of Lake Schwerin in northeast Germany, the Schwerin Residence Ensemble is an architectural and landscape ensemble, which fits very precisely within the context of the emergence and development of the historicist style in Europe. Created for the most part in the 19th century in what was then the capital of the Grand Duchy of Mecklenburg-Schwerin in northeast Germany, the property comprises 38 elements, including the Grand Duke’s Residence Palace and manor houses, cultural and sacred buildings, and the Pfaffenteich ornamental lake. But it also fulfils all the functions required of a ducal capital in terms of administration, defence, service infrastructure, transportation, prestige and cultural activities, with parks, canals, ponds and lakes, and public spaces. The buildings form an exceptional architectural ensemble, ranging from Neo­-Classical to Neo-Baroque and Neo-Renaissance and even includes in certain cases references to the more regional Neo-Renaissance "Johann-Albrecht" style, with influences from the Italian Renaissance. 

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Established on the shores of Lake Schwerin, the Schwerin Residence Ensemble is an architectural and landscape ensemble which fits very precisely within the context of the emergence and development of the historicist style in Europe, in the second half of the 19th century, and particularly in the German kingdoms and principalities. The establishment of the seat of Grand Ducal power in the 19th century led to the implementation in the city of Schwerin of an architectural and landscape programme that illustrates all the civil and religious functions of a capital city that was the seat of a monarch.

As result of the diversity of the architectural programmes, the ensemble provides a wide spectrum of buildings, which reflect the 19th-century historicist style, and in certain cases refer to the more regional “Johann-Albrecht” style, connecting the programmes even more closely to the history of the Grand Duchy. The choice made to establish the seat next to lakes and ponds, creating a landscape in which the architecture and gardens are reflected in the water, is a perfect illustration of the romantic taste in 19th-century Europe.

Criterion (iv): The Schwerin Residence Ensemble fits within the context of the emergence and development of the historicist style during the 19th century in Europe. Remarkably well-preserved, it constitutes an outstanding European royal residence ensemble of the 19th century by way of the richness and diversity of its architecture and landscape features, which express the whole spectrum of historicism, from neo-Renaissance to neo-Baroque and neo-Classicism, neo-Gothic and the regional “Johann-Albrecht” historicist style.

Integrity

The boundaries of the Schwerin Residence Ensemble encompass all the landscape, architectural and stylistic attributes, as well as the perspectives and visual axes, necessary to express its Outstanding Universal Value. The property in its landscape context presents the necessary characteristics to express the importance of this well-preserved historicist ensemble; it is not threatened by any unfavourable development or abandonment.

Authenticity

The location and setting, or form of the thirty-eight elements comprising the Schwerin Residence Ensemble have been preserved. These elements have evolved over time, and in many cases their use has changed, resulting essentially in adaptations and alterations to interior arrangements. The general design, structures and materials of the ensemble have been preserved. The relationship of the buildings to their landscape setting, whether with the gardens or the lakes and ponds, or with the perspectives and vistas, has also been preserved.

Protection and management requirements

The thirty-eight elements comprising the Schwerin Residence Ensemble are protected at Federal level and by the Monument Protection Act (DSchG M-V) of the State of Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania. The elements are identified as properties whose preservation is a matter of public interest. The Federal Building Code (Baugesetzbuch – BauGB, 1960, amended in 2017) provides the basis for land use and urban planning; it includes provisions for the preservation of properties inscribed on the World Heritage List. Furthermore, the laws and regulations relating to the protection of nature and landscapes, and of water resources, also apply within the boundaries of the property and its buffer zone.

A management plan has been prepared to be used as a control and planning instrument. It will have to be periodically assessed and updated. The World Heritage Coordination Office, supported by expert and advisory groups, is a crucial element to ensure the coordination and effectiveness of the management of the property. A rigorous strategy for the conservation of the buildings in the ensemble, and particularly of the interior layouts of those open to the public, and for the management of tourist flows inside the property and in the city, is essential to ensure that the Outstanding Universal Value of the property is maintained in the long-term.

Links
Deutsche UNESCO-Kommission

World Heritage Site Residence Ensemble Schwerin

News  1
UNESCO World Heritage: 24 new sites inscribed
1 August 2024
Germany
Date of Inscription: 2024
Criteria: (iv)
Property : 2,275.77 ha

Buffer zone: 2,691.95 ha
Dossier: 1705
N53 37 27 E11 25 8
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026