World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Umm Al-Jimāl
Umm Al-Jimāl
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Umm Al-Jimāl

The property is a rural settlement in northern Jordan that developed organically on the site of an earlier Roman settlement around the 5th century CE and functioned until the end of the 8th century CE. It preserves basaltic structures from the Byzantine and Early Islamic periods that represent the local architecture style of the Hauran region, with some earlier Roman military buildings re-purposed by later inhabitants. The settlement formed part of a broader agricultural landscape that included a complex water catchment system, which sustained agriculture and animal herding. The earliest structures uncovered at Umm Al-Jimāl date back to the 1st century CE, when the area formed part of the Nabataean Kingdom. A rich epigraphic corpus in Greek, Nabataean, Safaitic, Latin and Arabic uncovered on the site and spanning many centuries provides insights into its history, and sheds light on the changes in its inhabitants’ religious beliefs.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Umm Al-Jimāl, in present-day northern Jordan, preserves the vestiges of a rural settlement that developed organically on the site of an earlier Roman settlement around the 5th century CE and functioned until the end of the 8th century CE, when permanent settlement at the site ceased. Composed of clusters of multi-storey houses with courtyards arranged in three neighbourhoods, the town included sixteen churches of different types. Its layout and distinctive basaltic architecture of mostly domestic and religious character reflect local Hauranian building styles and designs rooted in pragmatism, cost-effectiveness and durability. A few notable well-preserved examples of earlier Roman imperial-type military buildings, which were incorporated into the structure of the town in the Byzantine period after being re-purposed, testify to the resilience of local traditions. The town formed part of a broader agricultural landscape that included a complex water catchment system, composed of a network of reservoirs and channels connecting the settlement to the nearby wadi, that ensured irrigation of the fields. Umm Al-Jimāl bears testimony to the rural way of life on the Hauran plateau in the Byzantine and Early Islamic periods, and epitomises the Hauranian culture with its agro-pastoral identity, reflecting the social values and cultural traditions of the Hauranian people. It provides a window into the hinterland of the imperial capitals and urban centres of the time.

Criterion (iii): As a typical rural Hauranian settlement that developed around agricultural and animal herding activities on the Hauran basaltic plateau, Umm Al-Jimāl is one of the most representative examples of the rural lifestyle of the Hauranian people, reflecting the key aspects of their cultural traditions and social values embodied in the well-preserved distinctive basalt architecture. By preserving the local architectural character and cultural traditions over centuries despite political or religious change, the property testifies to the resilience of the Hauranian culture.

Integrity

The property encompasses all the attributes of the settlement, including elements of the water catchment system, that are enclosed within the stone town wall. Preserved purposefully in a ruined state, these vestiges are in satisfactory overall condition, but in many cases the structures are not secured and some attributes remain vulnerable due to the lack of maintenance. The northern section of the property that has been left “untouched” entirely needs attention. The integrity of the broader setting of Umm Al-Jimāl has been compromised, as the agricultural landscape that once supported the existence of the settlement has been transformed and the ancient cemeteries damaged. The wadi rehabilitation project to the west of the site has heavily affected the setting of the property. Some modern structures within the buffer zone further compromise the visual integrity of the property.

Authenticity

The property is authentic in its form, design, and materials. Only a few of more than 170 structures in Umm Al-Jimāl have been investigated archaeologically. Restoration interventions have been kept to the minimum and include mostly consolidation; in a few cases anastylosis was completed. The only reconstructed House 119 serves as a visitor centre and a site museum. The water catchment system has been revitalised with a modern hose delivery system that mirrors the ancient channels. The agricultural landscape setting of the property has been transformed in result of contemporary urban developments, and the ancient burial grounds located outside the settlement’s wall were damaged. The rehabilitation of the wadi to the west of the site has further negatively affected the setting of the property.

Protection and management requirements

The site of Umm Al-Jimāl is a National Property and Protected Area since 1939, designated as “Antiquities Protectorate”. It is owned by the State and its boundaries are registered with the Department of Lands and Survey. The property is protected by the Antiquities Law 21/1988 and subsequent amendments, which also provide for the existence of a buffer zone with legal restrictions on construction or modification of buildings. Zoning regulations further control urban development in the buffer zone.

The Department of Antiquities of Jordan is responsible for the protection and management of the property. At the site level, Umm Al-Jimāl is under the purview of the Department’s Mafraq Antiquities Directorate and its Umm Al-Jimāl Site Management Unit. The Ministry of Tourism and Antiquities through its Mafraq office assumes control of tourism development, activities and facilities. Umm Al-Jimāl New Municipality collaborates in protecting the site and enforcing buffer zone restrictions.

The Umm Al-Jimāl Site Management Plan, which presents a five‑year vision for the future management of the site and formalisation of processes geared towards protection of the property, is yet to be approved.

News  1
UNESCO World Heritage: 24 new sites inscribed
1 August 2024
Jordan
Date of Inscription: 2024
Criteria: (iii)
Property : 42.584 ha

Buffer zone: 258.722 ha
Dossier: 1721
N32 19 37 E36 22 12
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026