World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Levoča, Spišský Hrad and the Associated ...
Levoča, Spišský Hrad and the Associated Cultural Monuments
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Assistance
Levoča, Spišský Hrad and the Associated Cultural Monuments

Spišský Hrad has one of the largest ensembles of 13th and 14th century military, political and religious buildings in eastern Europe, and its Romanesque and Gothic architecture has remained remarkably intact.

The extended site features the addition of the historic town-centre of Levoča founded in the 13th and 14th centuries within fortifications. Most of the site has been preserved and it includes the 14th century church of St James with its ten alters of the 15th and 16th centuries, a remarkable collection of polychrome works in the Late Gothic style, including an 18.6 metre high alterpiece by completed around 1510 by Master Paul.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief Synthesis

The castle of Spišský Hrad, the town of Levoča, the associated sites in Spišské Podhradie, Spišská, Kapitula, and Žehra constitute a remarkable group of military, urban, political, and religious elements, of a type that was relatively common in medieval Europe, but of which almost none have survived in such a complete condition with equivalent integrity. Levoča, Spišský Hrad, and the associated cultural monuments is one of the most extensive groups of military, urban, and religious buildings from the late Middle Ages and early Renaissance in Eastern Europe, the Romanesque and Gothic architecture of which has remained remarkably intact in Spišský Hrad, Spišské Podhradie, Spišská, Kapitula, and Žehra, together with the urban plan of Levoča. It is a group belonging to the same Saxon colonial settlement in the Middle Ages, of which it illustrates the material and cultural successes. It testifies to its role as a political, religious, and cultural centre of the first order over a long time-span in Eastern Europe.

Criterion (iv): Levoča, Spišský Hrad and the associated cultural monuments of Spišské Podhradie, Spišska Kapitula, and Zehra, extended to Levoča and the works of Master Paul in Spiš, constitute an outstanding example of a remarkably well preserved and authentic group of buildings which is characteristic of medieval settlement in Eastern Europe, in its military, political, religious, mercantile, and cultural functions.

Integrity and Authenticity

The Romanesque and Gothic architecture of Spišský Hrad and its associated cultural monuments, one of the most extensive groups of 13th and 14th century military, political, and religious buildings in Eastern Europe, has remained remarkably intact. The degree of authenticity of the property is satisfactory. Special attention should, however, be given to the quality of the maintenance and restoration work on the private buildings of Levoča.

Management and protection requirements

The protection of the property and the management plan and its practical organization are adequate. However, they need to be strengthened and improved in certain respects and the management plan needs to be published.

Links
Levoca

 View photos from OUR PLACE the World Heritage collection

Spišský Hrad

Activities 1
World Heritage Cities Programme
News  1
Cities of Caral-Supe (Peru) and Levoča (Slovakia) added to UNESCO’s World Heritage List
28 June 2009
Media
play_arrow Levoča, Spišský Hrad and the Associated Cultural ... (UNESCO/NHK)
Slovakia
Date of Inscription: 1993
Significant modifications to the boundaries : 2009
Criteria: (iv)
Property : 1,351.2252 ha

Buffer zone: 12,580.6784 ha
Dossier: 620bis
Serial: yes

Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2004 2003 2002 2001
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026