World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
The Great Spa Towns of Europe
The Great Spa Towns of Europe
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
The Great Spa Towns of Europe

This transnational serial property comprises eleven spa towns, located in seven European countries: Baden bei Wien (Austria); Spa (Belgium); Františkovy Lázně; Karlovy Vary; Mariánské Lázně (Czechia); Vichy (France); Bad Ems; Baden-Baden; Bad Kissingen (Germany); Montecatini Terme (Italy); and City of Bath (United Kingdom). All of these towns developed around natural mineral water springs. They bear witness to the international European spa culture that developed from the early 18th century to the 1930s, leading to the emergence of grand international resorts that impacted urban typology around ensembles of spa buildings such as baths, kurhaus and kursaal (buildings and rooms dedicated to therapy), pump rooms, drinking halls, colonnades and galleries designed to harness the natural mineral water resources and to allow their practical use for bathing and drinking. Related facilities include gardens, assembly rooms, casinos, theatres, hotels and villas, as well as spa-specific support infrastructure. These ensembles are all integrated into an overall urban context that includes a carefully managed recreational and therapeutic environment in a picturesque landscape. Together, these sites embody the significant interchange of human values and developments in medicine, science and balneology.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The Great Spas of Europe bear an exceptional testimony to the European spa phenomenon, which gained its highest expression from around 1700 to the 1930s. This transnational serial property comprises eleven spa towns located in seven countries: Baden bei Wien (Austria); Spa (Belgium); Karlovy Vary, Františkovy Lázně and Mariánské Lázně (Czechia); Vichy (France); Bad Ems, Baden-Baden and Bad Kissingen (Germany); Montecatini Terme (Italy); and City of Bath (United Kingdom). The series captures the most fashionable, dynamic and international spa towns among the many hundreds that contributed to the European spa phenomenon.

Whilst each spa town is different, all the towns developed around mineral water sources, which were the catalyst for a model of spatial organisation dedicated to curative, therapeutic, recreational and social functions. Ensembles of spa buildings include baths, pump rooms, drinking halls, treatment facilities and colonnades designed to harness the water resources and to allow its practical use for bathing and drinking. ‘Taking the cure’, externally and internally, was complemented by exercise and social activities requiring visitor facilities such as assembly rooms, casinos, theatres, hotels, villas and related infrastructures (from water piping systems and salts production to railways and funiculars). All are integrated into an overall urban context that includes a carefully managed recreational and therapeutic environment of parks, gardens, promenades, sports facilities and woodlands. Buildings and spaces connect visually and physically with their surrounding landscapes, which are used regularly for exercise as a contribution to the therapy of the cure, and for relaxation and enjoyment.

Criterion (ii): The Great Spas of Europe exhibits an important interchange of innovative ideas that influenced the development of medicine, balneology and leisure activities from around 1700 to the 1930s. This interchange is tangibly expressed through an urban typology centred on natural mineral springs and devoted to health and leisure. Those ideas influenced the popularity and development of spa towns and balneology throughout Europe and in other parts of the world.

The Great Spas of Europe became centres of experimentation which stayed abreast of their competitors by adapting to the changing tastes, sensitivities and requirements of visitors. Other than physicians, the principal agents of transmission were the architects, designers and gardeners who created the built and ‘natural’ environments framing spa life. As a result, the property displays important examples of spa architecture such as the ‘kurhaus’ and ‘kursaal’, pump rooms, drinking halls (‘trinkhalle’), colonnades and galleries designed to harness the natural mineral water resource and to allow its practical use for bathing and drinking.

Criterion (iii): The Great Spas of Europe bears exceptional testimony to the European spa phenomenon, which has its roots in antiquity, but gained its highest expression from around 1700 to the 1930s. ‘Taking the cure’, either externally (by bathing) or internally (by drinking, and inhaling) involved a highly structured and timed daily regime and a combination of medical aspects and leisure, including entertainment and social activities (e.g. gambling, theatre, music, dancing) as well as taking physical exercise within an outdoor therapeutic spa landscape.

These parameters directly influenced the spatial layout of spa towns and the form and function of spa buildings or ‘spa architecture’. Urban parks and promenades allowed people taking the cure “to see and be seen” by others.

Integrity

The eleven component parts that comprise the serial property represent the most exceptional examples of European spa towns. All component parts share a set of determining characteristics formed during the most significant “culture-creating” phase of their history and development, the heyday period from around 1700 to the 1930s. Each and every one continues to function for the purpose for which it was originally developed.

The series illustrates the main stages of the development of the spa phenomenon, starting with the most influential spa towns in the 18th century, to the development of model spa towns in the 19th century, to towns that are testimony to the last stages of the phenomenon in the early 20th century.

Boundaries are determined in relation to the mapping of the attributes that convey Outstanding Universal Value, namely: the most important spa structures and buildings used for thermal-related activities; the social facilities and buildings for leisure and pleasure; accommodation facilities; related spa infrastructure; and the surrounding therapeutic and recreational spa landscape. Buffer zones are drawn both for the protection of spring catchments and important setting.

All component parts and their constituent elements are generally in good condition. Elements requiring conservation either have works already planned, or are awaiting alternative uses, with their current state of conservation maintained. Upgrades and redevelopments made to keep pace with standards of services, hygiene and new spa technology, can create tensions with their conservation as historic buildings, and need to be carefully addressed. Challenges in the adaptive reuse and technical upgrading of industrial structures pose similar challenges.

Authenticity

The property meets the conditions of authenticity in terms of form and design, materials and substance, use and function, traditions, and location and setting.

All component parts express the Outstanding Universal Value of the property through a variety of common and highly authentic attributes: mineral springs, of great diversity, which maintain their natural physical qualities, including substance, location and setting; a distinct and highly legible spatial layout and a well-maintained location and setting that combine to retain an enduring spirit and feeling; spa architecture, that remains authentic in form and design, original materials and substance, even though some buildings have experienced change of use; the spa therapeutic landscape, which retains its form, design and function, and continues to be used for the purpose for which it was designed; spa infrastructure, much of which is either original or evolved on original principles and remains in use; continuing spa use and function despite the need to meet today’s standards.

The veracity and credible expression of attributes embodied in structures that date from around 1700 to the 1930s, the principal period of contribution to Outstanding Universal Value, is further evidenced during substantial and sustained conservation works that are informed by expansive archival collections of plans, documents, publications and photographs held at each component part.

Protection and management requirements

Responsibility for the protection and management of each of the eleven component parts of the property rests with the national/regional government (in the case of Germany, with the government of the Länder, and local authorities of that State Party). Each component is protected through legislation and spatial planning regulations applicable in its State Party or individual province, as well as by a significant degree of public/charitable ownership of key buildings and landscapes. Each component part has a property manager or coordinator and a Local Management Plan in place conforming to the overall Property Management Plan.

An overall management system for the whole property has been established, with a Property Management Plan and Action Plan agreed by all stakeholders. An Inter-Governmental Committee, made up of national World Heritage Focal Points and/or a representative of the highest monument or heritage protection authority, keeps track of matters relating to the property. A Great Spas Management Board (GSMB), made up of the Mayors of the eleven components, is responsible for the operational coordination and overall management of the property in close consultation with the Inter-Governmental Committee. The Board sets and manages the budget for the overall management functions, monitors and reviews the Action Plan, approves and publishes an Annual Report, employs the Secretariat, and directs other activities for the property as a whole.

The Site Managers Group includes site managers for each component part, the Secretariat, and any specialist advisors. The Site Managers Group is essentially an expert group for debate and exchanges of experience and to advise the GSMB on relevant management issues. The international structure is supported and serviced by a Secretariat jointly funded by all the component parts.

An important concern will be to continue to develop cooperation and collaboration between the individual component parts and to ensure that the property as a whole is effectively managed and the overall management system is adequately resourced. Development pressures may be an issue since these are living cities which will need to continue to adapt and change to maintain their role as spa towns. Managing tourism so that it is truly sustainable may also become a challenge. A management approach at the landscape level, which considers the relationship between each component part, the buffer zone, and the broader setting is also needed to maintain views to, and from, the picturesque wider landscape. 

Links
Deutsche UNESCO-Kommission

Google Arts & Culture: Story

City of Bath (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland)

Montecatini Terme (Italy)

Bad Kissingen (Germany)

Baden-Baden (Germany)

Bad Ems (Germany)

Vichy (France)

Mariánské Lázně (Czechia)

Karlovy Vary (Czechia)

Františkovy Lázně (Czechia)

Spa (Belgium)

Baden bei Wien (Austria)

Great Spa Towns of Europe

Activities 1
World Heritage Cities Programme
News  1
Five sites in the Arab and Europe regions inscribed on UNESCO’s World Heritage List
24 July 2021
Austria
Belgium
Czechia
France
Germany
Italy
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
Date of Inscription: 2021
Minor boundary modification inscribed year: 2024
Criteria: (ii)(iii)
Property : 7,018 ha

Buffer zone: 11,449 ha
Dossier: 1613bis
Serial: yes

Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2025 2023
Protections
by other conservation instruments

1 protection / 2 elements

Biosphere Reserves (2 elements)

Rhön
Wienerwald

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026