World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Vineyard Landscape of Piedmont: Langhe-Roero ...
Vineyard Landscape of Piedmont: Langhe-Roero and Monferrato
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Vineyard Landscape of Piedmont: Langhe-Roero and Monferrato

This landscape covers five distinct wine-growing areas with outstanding landscapes and the Castle of Cavour, an emblematic name both in the development of vineyards and in Italian history. It is located in the southern part of Piedmont, between the Po River and the Ligurian Apennines, and encompasses the whole range of technical and economic processes relating to the winegrowing and winemaking that has characterized the region for centuries. Vine pollen has been found in the area dating from the 5th century BC, when Piedmont was a place of contact and trade between the Etruscans and the Celts; Etruscan and Celtic words, particularly wine-related ones, are still found in the local dialect. During the Roman Empire, Pliny the Elder mentions the Piedmont region as being one of the most favourable for growing vines in ancient Italy; Strabo mentions its barrels.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The vineyard landscapes of Langhe-Roero and Monferrato in Piedmont consist of a selection of five distinct winegrowing areas and a castle, whose names evoke profound and ancient expertise in the relationship between man and his environment. They reflect a slowly developed association between a diverse range of soils, grape varieties that are often native, and suitable winemaking processes. They offer panoramas of carefully cultivated hillsides, following ancient land divisions punctuated with buildings that lend structure to the visual space: hilltop villages, castles, Romanesque churches, farms, ciabots, cellars and storehouses for cellaring and for the commercial distribution of the wine in the small towns and larger towns on the margins of the vineyards. The serial property is outstanding for its harmony, and the balance between the aesthetic qualities of its landscapes, the architectural and historical diversity of the built elements associated with the wine production activities and an authentic and ancient art of winemaking. 

Criterion (iii): The cultural landscapes of the Piedmont vineyards provide outstanding living testimony to winegrowing and winemaking traditions that stem from a long history, and that have been continuously improved and adapted up to the present day. They bear witness to an extremely comprehensive social, rural and urban realm, and to sustainable economic structures. They include a multitude of harmonious built elements that bear witness to its history and its professional practices. 

Criterion (v): The vineyards of Langhe-Roero and Monferrato constitute an outstanding example of man’s interaction with his natural environment. Following a long and slow evolution of winegrowing expertise, the best possible adaptation of grape varieties to land with specific soil and climatic components has been carried out, which in itself is related to winemaking expertise, thereby becoming an international benchmark. The winegrowing landscape also expresses great aesthetic qualities, making it into an archetype of European vineyards. 

Integrity

The integrity of the serial property is satisfactory, as it contains all the elements required for full expression of its values. Considered as a whole, its five components fully express the cultural, residential, architectural, environmental and productive complexity of this winegrowing and winemaking region. It bears witness to an ensemble of centuries-old traditions that have gradually been built up. The integrity of the nominated serial property is fully justified, and all the technical and social processes associated with grape production and winemaking, with a high degree of expertise, are properly illustrated. 

Authenticity

The authenticity of the landscape elements and the many cultural elements of the serial property has been justified. The use of the soils, the built structures and the social organisation of all the stages of the winemaking process, from tending and harvesting the grapes to vinification, are an expression of continuity of ancient practices and expertise to form authentic ensembles in each component of the serial property. The Piedmont vineyard landscape is undoubtedly one of the most harmonious and most consistent with the ideal of a “scenic” rural and vineyard landscape, accentuated by the gently rolling hills that provide many vistas and panoramas with subtle nuances. 

Protection and Management requirements

The property is protected under the Cultural Heritage and Landscape Code (Decree n°42 of 22 January 2004), under the responsibility of the Cultural Heritage Ministry and its regional agencies. It defines the responsibilities of the public regional and local authorities and the application procedures. The municipalities regulate and control permits for building and alterations. They do so with reference to municipal regulatory plans and urban development plans. The protection of the buffer zones has been confirmed by the Provincial Act of 30 September 2013. 

The Management Association groups together the municipalities covered by the serial property and buffer zones, under the authority of the Region for the purpose of coordinating the conservation measures. This results in the implementation of precisely defined programmes, gathered together in the Management Plan. The Agreement Act embodies the commitment of each municipality and each administration to apply the protection measures and the sector conservation plans, and to actively participate in the management and enhancement of the property.

Links
Linkedin page

YouTube page

Instagram page

Facecook page

Official website

Activities 1
Cultural Landscapes
News  2
Twenty six new properties added to World Heritage List at Doha meeting
25 June 2014
World Heritage List reaches 1000 sites with inscription of Okavango Delta in Botswana
22 June 2014
Italy
Date of Inscription: 2014
Criteria: (iii)(v)
Property : 10,785.33 ha

Buffer zone: 76,295.98 ha
Dossier: 1390rev
Serial: yes

Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

Protections
by other conservation instruments

1 protection / 1 element

Biosphere Reserves (1 element)

Monviso

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026