World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Via Appia. Regina Viarum
Via Appia. Regina Viarum
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Via Appia. Regina Viarum

More than 800 kilometres long, the Via Appia is the oldest and most important of the great roads built by the Ancient Romans. Constructed and developed from 312 BCE to the 4th century CE, it was originally conceived as a strategic road for military conquest, advancing towards the East and Asia Minor. The Via Appia later enabled the cities it connected to grow and new settlements emerged, facilitating agricultural production and trade. This property, composed of 19 component parts, is a fully developed ensemble of engineering works, illustrating the advanced technical skill of Roman engineers in the construction of roads, civil engineering projects, infrastructure and sweeping land reclamation works, as well as a vast series of monumental structures including, for example, triumphal arches, baths, amphitheatres and basilicas, aqueducts, canals, bridges, and public fountains.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The serial property Via Appia. Regina Viarum is the oldest Roman road whose route is beyond doubt and among the first created. Built under the authority of the Censor Appius Claudius Caecus from 312 BCE onwards, the Via Appia was originally conceived as a strategic road for military conquest, connecting, via the most direct route, Rome to Capua. As Rome was continuing its territorial expansion, the Via Appia was extended towards Beneventum, Tarentum and Brundisium, thereby paving the way to conquest of the East and Asia Minor. The Via Appia, once the territories conquered by Rome had been stabilized, rapidly became a key route for trade and territorial and cultural development, and was open to everyone to use toll-free. In 109 CE, Emperor Trajan inaugurated the Via Traiana, an extension of the Via Appia intended to connect Beneventum to Brundisium more easily along the Adriatic coast.

Roman engineering resources were fully harnessed to build the Via Appia and Via Traiana, involving sweeping land reclamation works, the construction of major civil engineering works and the use of the most enduring and innovative techniques to build the carriageway. In addition, the road was equipped with numerous amenities to facilitate travel. At many points along it were military milestones indicating distances, fountains for people and animals, and way stations which were soon converted into accommodation and stopping places for travellers. A series of necropolises and funerary sites developed around the road and religious sanctuaries were established on the outskirts of towns. The road set the stage for a vast series of monumental works to be built, and enabled the cities it connected to grow too. New settlements emerged in connection with the Via Appia and an official land division system was introduced.

The Via Appia continued to be used throughout the centuries. It remains an access route to rural villages. At the beginning of the Middle Ages, the Church of Rome relied on it to spread Christianity by reviving agriculture. From the 11th century, the buildings lining the road were repurposed as defensive structures, and pilgrims and Crusaders travelled along it on the way to the Holy Land. Amid renewed interest in antiquity and its monuments during the Renaissance, the Papacy had restoration works carried out on the road due to its spiritual and historical value for Christianity. In the 16th century, the idea of archaeological conservation of the road began to take shape.

The Via Appia assumed significance in the collective memory, whether in literary or iconographic terms, or even musically speaking. It became a key stage of the Grand Tour.

Criterion (iii): The Via Appia. Regina Viarum is among the most enduring testimonies that Roman civilisation has bequeathed to posterity. Its construction was a feat of engineering and technical design which had an influence over much of the Mediterranean for more than a thousand years. The route is lined with all the structural and urban typologies that are characteristic of Roman civilisation.

Criterion (iv): The Via Appia. Regina Viarum bears witness to the outstanding organisational capabilities and administrative efficiency of Roman civilisation. The Via Appia is an example of the innovative technical prowess developed by Rome, the construction of which, in addition to the infrastructures directly associated with it, served as a point of reference for the division of land assigned to army veterans and promoted the regulation and aggregation of new urban residential areas along its course as it was often chosen as a decumanus. The Via Appia thus shaped the development of the ancient cities it connected or which were associated with it. The Via Appia is also accompanied by a monumental ensemble of temples, funerary monuments, aqueducts and villas, and at city entrances, triumphal arches, gates or such amenities as theatres, amphitheatres or baths which all bear witness to an age-old civilisation.

Criterion (vi): The Via Appia. Regina Viarum was a major vector for the spread of ideas and beliefs. It played a key role in the spread of the Christian religion and provided passage to the Holy Land for the Crusaders and huge numbers of pilgrims. Representative of Rome’s power, the Via Appia was symbolically used from the 16th century onwards by numerous victorious generals or monarchs to celebrate their power or their victories. The Via Appia was celebrated by artists of the Renaissance. An object of study for archaeologists, architects and academics, it has fascinated generations of visitors embarking on their Grand Tour.

Integrity

The component parts of the Via Appia. Regina Viarum present notable differences in terms of size and character, which may be natural or urban. Their attributes differ in number, quality or significance and by their state of conservation. They all play a part in representing the Via Appia in its character, course and coherence. The component parts illustrate the major infrastructural achievement that is the Via Appia and its impact on the economic, social and political development of the regions conquered by Rome. The attributes are for the most part archaeological vestiges. They are identifiable and present a good state of conservation.

Authenticity

The Via Appia. Regina Viarum encompasses a vast ensemble of archaeological sites which still retain a number of attributes that are representatives of the role and functions of the road and the wider territory which was able to develop thanks to it. In this context, the initial concept and form have evolved over time but remain nevertheless. The same can be said for the materials and the substance. The road’s primary function concerns the movement of people, goods and ideas. This has evolved without ever disappearing completely over the centuries of its use. Uses have evolved in terms of their motivation but not in terms of their purpose. The wealth of information and knowledge obtained about the Via Appia over the centuries through scientific research and also artistic and literary works also contributes to its authenticity.

Protection and management requirements

The component parts of the Via Appia. Regina Viarum are protected under the Code of the Cultural Heritage and Landscape (Codice dei beni culturali e del paesaggio), drafted pursuant to the Law of 6 July 2002. The Ministry of Culture is responsible for the protection and conservation of cultural heritage, irrespective of ownership of the sites, guaranteed through the local offices for archaeology, fine arts and landscape (Soprintendenze), and coordinated centrally by the Directorate-General for Archaeology, Fine Arts and Landscape. This includes the definition and application of national standards for conservation, restoration and safeguarding to ensure the integrity of the property. Moreover, the Ministry of Culture is responsible for the presentation of its own cultural properties, thereby contributing to the overall management and promotion of the whole of the Via Appia. The regions, together with the local offices of the Ministry of Culture (the Soprintendenze), are in charge of planning related to landscape and cultural properties, via Regional Landscape Plans.

Any modification or transformation is subject to an authorisation, a prerequisite to obtaining the building permit, which is issued by the region or, by delegation, a local authority (province or municipality) and is subject to agreement from the Soprintendenze.  Lastly, environmental protection measures concerning the serial property and the buffer zones are provided for in the framework of Natura 2000 areas, natural protected areas and those defined by the Regional Territorial Landscape Plan (PTPR).

The management system provides for the designation of a single body as the focal point for coordinating the property’s management. The role of this structure will be to maintain coordination between the different stakeholders and to carry out actions as part of a network to ensure the overall conservation and promotion of the management plan. It will oversee and manage the network of stakeholders and associated institutions.

News  1
UNESCO World Heritage: 24 new sites inscribed
1 August 2024
Italy
Date of Inscription: 2024
Criteria: (iii)(iv)(vi)
Property : 4,950.84 ha

Buffer zone: 42,588.54 ha
Dossier: 1708
Serial: yes

Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026