World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Old City of Acre
Old City of Acre
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Old City of Acre

Acre is a historic walled port-city with continuous settlement from the Phoenician period. The present city is characteristic of a fortified town dating from the Ottoman 18th and 19th centuries, with typical urban components such as the citadel, mosques, khans and baths. The remains of the Crusader town, dating from 1104 to 1291, lie almost intact, both above and below today's street level, providing an exceptional picture of the layout and structures of the capital of the medieval Crusader kingdom of Jerusalem.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Acre, continuously settled from Phoenician times, was of major significance during the Crusader period in the Holy Land. Because of its position, located on a peninsula encompassing a natural bay, the city gained international significance from 1104 to 1291 as the capital of the Crusader kingdom of Jerusalem following its development as the Crusaders main port in the Holy Land. Whilst this strategically located port enabled it to become a centre for international trade, its physical boundaries, delineated by surrounding walls and sea, created a characteristic densely built mediaeval city.

Following a long period of decline, during which it was still the main entry port for Christian pilgrims visiting Jerusalem, it flourished again in the 18th century as the capital of this part of the Ottoman Empire. Its unique character is in the substantial remains of the Crusader city that are preserved virtually intact beneath the typical Ottoman city preserved till the present day, and have in recent years been revealed by scientific excavation.

The present townscape of the walled port-town is characteristic of Moslem perceptions of urban design, with narrow winding streets and fine public buildings and houses. Demonstrating the interchange of mediaeval European and Middle-Eastern architecture, the city has some exceptional edifices, including a citadel, mosques, khans and baths.

Criterion (ii): Acre is an exceptional historic port-town in that it preserves the substantial remains of its medieval Crusader buildings beneath the existing Moslem fortified town dating from the 18th and 19th centuries.

Criterion (iii): The remains of the Crusader town of Acre, both above and below the present-day street level, provide an exceptional picture of the layout and structures of the capital of the medieval Crusader Kingdom of Jerusalem.

Criterion (v): Present-day Acre is an important example of an Ottoman walled town, with typical urban components such as the citadel, mosques, khans, and baths well preserved, partly built on top of the underlying Crusader structures.

Integrity

The boundaries of the property include the key elements of Crusader Acre which having been completely buried as a result of the Mamluk occupation at the end of the 13th century, is today mostly subterranean and has only recently begun to be uncovered. These well preserved remains include large portions of the fabric of urban life and buildings with all parts intact - walls, quarters, streets, alleys, fortresses, public buildings, religious buildings, dwellings, and shops, together with the subterranean infrastructure, architectural details, original plasterwork, and masonry. Building plans are clearly identifiable and building technology and materials can be accurately determined.

The property also encompasses the remains of the Ottoman city that was built on the Crusader city and took the form of an urban system of alleyways, courtyards, and squares, reflecting the values of Moslem society. The geographical conditions that determined its development, together with its socio-economic structure, have maintained the integrity of Acre as essentially an Ottoman port-city of the 18th century without significant changes until the present time.

The overall coherence of the city is vulnerable especially where maintenance and conservation activities are yet to be undertaken.

Authenticity

Two major periods in history have contributed to the appearance of contemporary Acre: the Crusader period and the late Ottoman period. The special nature of the city's evolution has allowed Acre to retain its character as a port city, with a blend of public buildings, caravanserais (khans), and religious buildings alongside markets, small shops, and large residential quarters, together with an active port which is still a source of income and access to the city. The major proportion of Acre's individual buildings have remained largely in the same form as when they were built, with few major alterations over the last 150-300 years. However, individual buildings remain vulnerable to changes away from traditional materials and methods of maintenance and repair.

Protection and management requirements

The Old City of Acre is a designated a site of antiquity under the 1978 Antiquity Law.

Between 1993 and 2000 a heritage-focused Master Plan was drawn up by a steering committee for urban planning. This integrated the old city and port areas whilst also establishing a surrounding buffer zone.

The property is managed jointly by Acre's Municipality, the Old Acre Development Company, a Government Agency, and the Israeli Antiquities Authority. Advising local residents in all matters of development, building permits and conservation measures the Israeli Antiquities Authority also operates a field office in the city. This office also supervises public and private work undertaken in the property.

Much effort is being invested to ensure that the city of Acre remains a living city. In 2001, together with the local population, a residential quarter was selected as a Pilot Rehabilitation Project area. This project is ongoing and expanding, and aimed at developing measures to ensure the preservation of the physical fabric, whilst allowing adaptations required by modern life. Another goal is directed towards improving the social and economic conditions of local residents, and enhancing their sense of pride in the city's rich heritage. There is a need to strengthen the engagement of the local community in the maintenance of the built fabric of the city.

Links
Old Akko

The Old Akko & Nazareth Development Company

Acre Municipality Facebook page (in hebrew only)

 View photos from OUR PLACE the World Heritage collection

Website of the property

Activities 1
World Heritage Cities Programme
News  2
UNESCO Director-General launches “heritage alert” for the Middle East
11 August 2006
World Heritage Committee Inscribes 31 New Sites on the World Heritage List
13 December 2001
Media
play_arrow Old City of Acre (UNESCO/NHK)
Israel
Date of Inscription: 2001
Criteria: (ii)(iii)(v)
Property : 63.3 ha

Buffer zone: 22.99 ha
Dossier: 1042
Western Galilee
N32 55 18 E35 4 8
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026