World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Notre-Dame Cathedral in Tournai
Notre-Dame Cathedral in Tournai
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Notre-Dame Cathedral in Tournai

The Cathedral of Notre-Dame in Tournai was built in the first half of the 12th century. It is especially distinguished by a Romanesque nave of extraordinary dimensions, a wealth of sculpture on its capitals and a transept topped by five towers, all precursors of the Gothic style. The choir, rebuilt in the 13th century, is in the pure Gothic style.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The Notre-Dame Cathedral in Tournai lies at the heart of the old city not far from the left bank of the Escaut. The present building is not homogeneous with regard to its chronology and conception, but the result of three coherent projects, completed and still distinguishable: the Romanesque nave and the transept, and the Gothic choir. The construction of the first two was for the greater part carried out in one go during the early 12th century; no major modification was made to the building during the following centuries, limiting its adaptations to the times.

It is difficult to associate the Cathedral with just one influence or school, but in its design and its elevations it presents layouts that influenced the development of early Gothic art. In particular, it is distinguished by a Romanesque nave of impressive dimensions and richly sculptured and by a transept with five towers that indicate the beginnings of Gothic art. The choir, rebuilt in the 13th century, is of pure Gothic style. The conception of the nave illustrates a great originality with several important innovations. The transposition to the exterior of the running course of the tall windows, the rise to four levels and the double western door make the nave a unicum in the history of Romanesque architecture, while the sobriety of the ornamental elements appears to be due to the weight of Carolingian traditions, particulary sensitive in the early Low Countries. The master builder has thus executed a remarkable synthesis between the most innovative aspects of the architecture of his time, although taking some liberties, and the local traditions.

The dimensions of the transept adorned with five towers, is surely the most emblematic characteristic of the Tournai Cathedral. Today, the sources are not sufficiently interpreted, between the so-called « Lombard-Rhine » influence and the harmonic façades of France and England. However, its posterity is evident; the model flourished throughout the second half of the 12th century. The Gothic choir marks the introduction of new forms of classic Gothic in Belgium in the middle of the 13th century. It is particularly representative of the era of its construction. It bears witness to the tremendous technological progress of the end of the 12th and beginning of the 13th century. It is also an example of the rapid spread of this architecture from the creative centres of Ile-de-France dating from the middle of the 13th century onwards. Indeed, it is a fashionable, « à la page » building using the most recent techniques and the embellishments in the taste of the time. 

Criterion (ii): The Notre-Dame Cathedral in Tournai  bears witness to a considerable exchange of influence between the architectures of the Ile-de-France, the Rhineland and Normandy during the short period at the beginning of the 12th century that preceded the flowering of Gothic architecture.

Criterion (iv): In its imposing dimensions, the Notre-Dame Cathedral in Tournai is an outstanding example of the great edifices of the school of the north of the Seine, precursors of the vastness of the Gothic cathedrals. 

Integrity

Throughout the centuries, the Notre-Dame Cathedral in Tournai has preserved its architectural expression as well as its religious and cultural functions. Since its construction, it symbolises episcopal power. Its importance is expressed through the architectural quality of the building and its location in the urban fabric, veritable landmark in the centre of the urban landscape, as well as through its visual and symbolic relation to the nearby belfry. 

Authenticity

The authenticity of the Notre-Dame Cathedral in Tournai is beyond doubt. The inevitable 19th century restorations (common to every major building of the Middle Ages) retained its outstanding external dimensions and the alterations to the west façade, minor in relation to the size of the building, are now part of its history. The damage caused by World War II bombardments was mainly limited to fire damage to the roof of the nave and to some of the chapter buildings. The restorations were carried out with the greatest respect for the building, as were the works ensuring the longevity of the Cathedral, now a fragile and aging building. 

Protection and management requirements

The Cathedral in Tournai was among the first listed properties in Belgium (05/02/1936), and it is inscribed on the list of outstanding heritage in Wallonia, a list established by the Walloon Government recording outstanding elements of the Walloon heritage. It is also located in the protected centre of old Tournai.

Since its inscription on the World Heritage List, the Cathedral has undergone an extensive restoration programme, spread over nearly 20 years, with the aim not only to restore the religious building, but also the promotion of the property and its buffer zone. The project associates all the actors and has a Scientific Committee.

Following the decision of the Walloon Government of 25 August 2011 to provide all the Walloon sites inscribed on the World Heritage List with a management plan, a Steering Committee, a Scientific Committee and a Management Committee were established.

Links
Tournai Cathedral (only in French)

Tournai. A different point of view

www.cathedraledetournai.be

Ville de Tournai (french only)

Activities 1
World Heritage Cities Programme
News  2
World Heritage sites participate in Earth Hour 2013
22 March 2013
World Heritage Committee Inscribes 61 New Sites on World Heritage List
30 November 2000
Media
play_arrow Notre-Dame Cathedral in Tournai (UNESCO/NHK)
Belgium
Date of Inscription: 2000
Criteria: (ii)(iv)
Property : 0.4963 ha

Buffer zone: 20.2219 ha
Dossier: 1009
Province of Hainaut, Wallonia Region
N50 36 21.708 E3 23 21.336
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2024
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026