World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Ferrara, City of the Renaissance, and its Po ...
Ferrara, City of the Renaissance, and its Po Delta
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Ferrara, City of the Renaissance, and its Po Delta

Ferrara, which grew up around a ford over the River Po, became an intellectual and artistic centre that attracted the greatest minds of the Italian Renaissance in the 15th and 16th centuries. Here, Piero della Francesca, Jacopo Bellini and Andrea Mantegna decorated the palaces of the House of Este. The humanist concept of the 'ideal city' came to life here in the neighbourhoods built from 1492 onwards by Biagio Rossetti according to the new principles of perspective. The completion of this project marked the birth of modern town planning and influenced its subsequent development.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Ferrara, City of the Renaissance, and its Po Delta, situated within the Emilia Romagna region of Italy, is a remarkable cultural landscape. The area comprises the urban centre of Ferrara and adjoining agricultural lands within the ancient and vast Po River Delta.

The inscribed property extends to the ring of defensive walls that first enclosed the historic urban centre of Ferrara in the 12th century. Over time, the encircling walls of the medieval town were extended to accommodate urban growth, and today the walls encircle the medieval city, the Cathedral of San Giorgio and the Estense Castle. A series of urban planning schemes were implemented from the 14th to 16th centuries, which made Ferrara the first Renaissance city to be developed using a complex urban plan. In this plan, the network of streets and walls were closely linked with the palaces, churches and gardens as part of an overall scheme that gave precedence to the harmonious layout of urban perspectives, rather than accentuating the beauty of individual buildings. The best known of these schemes, the Addizione Erculea designed by Biagio Rossetti at the end of the 15th century, was one of the first urban plans based on the idea of perspective – that is, balancing humanist principles relating to form and volume in architecture with open space, the needs of the city, and local traditions.

The Po Delta of the Po River valley has been settled for millennia. From the 14th to the 16th centuries, the ruling Este family carried out extensive land reclamation and building projects, which give this area a distinctive character link with Ferrara, seat of the Este family. Transformations made to the countryside surrounding Ferrara during the Renaissance included: drainage of huge swathes of swampland, establishment of castalderie (estates), creation of new waterways and streets as part of the overall urban development plan and construction of a network of noble residences known as the delizie estensi. This work led to a new fabric of agricultural production and the construction of Ducal residences as the political sign of magnificence. These were designed to mirror the image of the Court beyond the urban confines and again formed part of a process of integration and continuity between the city and the surrounding countryside. The original form of the Renaissance landscape of the Po River Delta is still recognisable in the region’s 21st-century layout.

The history of the Renaissance city of Ferrara is closely bound to the Este family and their rule.  The city had been an important medieval centre, a free city with its own laws and even its own mint, but only under the Este’s was it to become an internationally known capital with great importance for the arts, economics, ideology and religion. The court flourished in splendour and for two centuries was on a par with cities such as Florence and Venice or with other great European courts in France or Spain.

Artists such as Piero della Francesca, Mantegna and Michelangelo attended the Este Court and worked there. With great support from these artists, the Este family created the first example of a studiolo and their practice of art collection became a model for both the Medici family and the Pope. 

Criterion (ii): Developments in town planning expressed in Renaissance Ferrara had a profound influence on town design practice and planned preservation throughout the succeeding centuries. The Ferrarese architectural school (Biagio Rosetti, Girolamo da Carpi, Giambattista Aleotti, etc.) exported urban design views and elements such as walls and fortresses into the planning of other Italian and European cities.

Criterion (iii): The Este ducal residences in the Po Delta illustrate the influence of Renaissance culture on the natural landscape in an exceptional manner.

Criterion (iv): The historical town of Ferrara is an exceptional example of Renaissance period urban planning in which the layout and built forms from this period are still visible and where the urban fabric is virtually intact.

Criterion (v): The Po Delta is an outstanding planned cultural landscape that retains its original form to a remarkable extent.

Criterion (vi): During the two seminal centuries of the Renaissance, the brilliant court of the Este family attracted leading artists, poets and philosophers and became a major centre for the development and practical application of ‘new humanism’ in Italy. 

Integrity

The 46,712 ha inscribed property, along with the 117,649 ha buffer zone, encompasses all the elements necessary to understand the Renaissance cultural landscape of Ferrara and its Po Delta, which substantiates its Outstanding Universal Value. The intactness of the property is evidenced in the Renaissance period layout of the city of Ferrara as well as in the landscape changes and transformations of the surrounding agricultural landscape. The wholeness of Renaissance Ferrara is visible in the medieval walls, the forms of the 14th to 16th century town planning schemes, the surviving and largely original buildings and in the well preserved layout of the city that is easily understood by visitors. The wider landscape of the World Heritage property is most evident in the remaining delizie that point to the land transformation schemes undertaken during the time of the ruling Este family.

Thus the Renaissance cultural landscape of Ferrara and the Po Delta forms a historical whole. However, changing methods of cultivation and economic priorities, as well as the introduction of new infrastructure are concerns that will need to be holistically addressed in order to maintain the conditions of integrity. 

Authenticity

Ferrara, City of the Renaissance, and its Po Delta is a cultural landscape that is exceptionally well preserved and is authentic in its form and design, materials, setting, spirit, and feeling. The originality of the urban fabric of Ferrara, along with its Renaissance design and layout elements, makes it a clearly recognisable Renaissance city. Some of the delizie are authentic in relation to original large farm settings and are in excellent condition following restoration works carried out since 1970. The relationships of Renaissance elements with branches of the Po River (Po di Ferrara, Primaro, Volàno, Sandalo) are readily recognisable and the ancient course of these rivers and streams are clearly visible today. Despite a long history of damage to the property, it retains a truthfulness and credibility with regard to its expression of Outstanding Universal Value. 

Protection and management requirements

The protection and management of Ferrara, City of the Renaissance and its Po Delta requires the cooperation of public institutions at different levels of government: national, regional, provincial and municipal.

The property is protected under national cultural heritage legislation: the "Codice dei Beni Culturali e del Paesaggio" (Legislative Decree 42/2004). Local offices of the "Ministero per i Beni e le Attività culturali" (Regional Management and Supervision) undertake monitoring to ensure compliance with the national legislation.

At the regional level, there are three specific planning systems. The Regional Landscape Plan (PTPR) establishes regulations with regard to the historical-cultural identity of locations and the surrounding landscape. The Po Delta Park Plan’s aim is to protect the areas of natural importance. The Provincial Territorial Plan (PTCP) identifies the synergies and actions needed to develop traditional economic activities and tourism in a manner that protects the character of the environment and the countryside. The plan encompasses the large area that makes up both the inscribed property area and its buffer zone.

In addition, the Municipality of Ferrara has an approved Urban Planning Tool that identifies the whole of the historic city inside the walls as an area of cultural interest and consolidates the high degree of protection that has been in place since 1975. There are several programmes with specific aims that deal with conserving the Renaissance walls and open spaces inside and outside the city walls.

The management of the property is coordinated through a multi-level government Site Steering Committee. The Committee is responsible for preparing and implementing the annual Management Plan. A key aim of the Management Plan is to increase public awareness, particularly of local residents and workers, with regard to the extent of the property and its outstanding importance.

Sustaining the Outstanding Universal Value of the property and maintaining its conditions of authenticity and integrity over time will require the creation of improved linkages and coordinated management between the urban landscape of Ferrara and the rural landscape of the network of delizie, the improvement of the regional regulatory regime to effective control use and transformation of the area and infrastructure development, the increase of local awareness of the heritage values of the properties and opportunities to enjoy the area’s heritage and the definition of clear policies for the adaptive reuse of historic properties that have been abandoned or damaged. Also, sufficient resources for interventions will need to be allocated to address the considerable damages from the May 2012 earthquakes, particularly to the city walls, the Estense Castle, the medieval cathedral, the Rocca (bastion) of Stellata and to several historic buildings.

Notes

At the time the property was extended, criteria (iii) and (v) were also found applicable.

Links
Ferrara, Renaissance City and its Po Delta

 View photos from OUR PLACE the World Heritage collection

Ferrara (only in Italian)

Activities 1
World Heritage Cities Programme
News  4
Preliminary findings of UNESCO mission sent to assess earthquake damage to sites in northern Italy
12 June 2012
UNESCO mission assesses earthquake damage to sites in northern Italy
7 June 2012
UNESCO monitors damage to heritage in northern Italy following powerful earthquake
22 May 2012
World Heritage Committee Inscribes 48 New Sites on Heritage List
2 December 1999
Events  1
Conference "New Frontiers in Urban Conservation. The challenge of the UNESCO Recommendation on Historic Urban Landscape"
10 Nov 2014 - 10 Nov 2014
Media
play_arrow Ferrara, City of the Renaissance, and its Po Delta (UNESCO/NHK)
Italy
Date of Inscription: 1995
Significant modifications to the boundaries : 1999
Criteria: (ii)(iii)(iv)(v)(vi)
Property : 46,712 ha

Buffer zone: 117,649 ha
Dossier: 733bis
Serial: yes

Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2012
Protections
by other conservation instruments

1 protection / 2 elements

RAMSAR (2 elements)

Valle Bertuzzi
Valli residue del comprensorio di Comacchio

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026