World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Lagoons of New Caledonia: Reef Diversity and ...
Lagoons of New Caledonia: Reef Diversity and Associated Ecosystems
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Lagoons of New Caledonia: Reef Diversity and Associated Ecosystems

This serial site comprises six marine clusters that represent the main diversity of coral reefs and associated ecosystems in the French Pacific Ocean archipelago of New Caledonia and one of the three most extensive reef systems in the world. These Lagoons are of exceptional natural beauty. They feature an exceptional diversity of coral and fish species and a continuum of habitats from mangroves to seagrasses with the world’s most diverse concentration of reef structures. The Lagoons of New Caledonia display intact ecosystems, with healthy populations of large predators, and a great number and diversity of big fish. They provide habitat to a number of emblematic or threatened marine species such as turtles, whales or dugongs whose population here is the third largest in the world.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

The tropical lagoons and coral reefs of New Caledonia are an outstanding example of high diversity coral reef ecosystems and form one of the three most extensive reef systems in the world. They are the location for the world’s most diverse concentration of reef structures, with an exceptional diversity of coral and fish species and a continuum of habitats from mangroves to seagrasses and a wide range of reef forms, extending over important oceanic gradients. They still display intact ecosystems, with healthy populations of top predators, and a large number and diversity of large fish. They are of exceptional natural beauty, and contain diverse reefs of varying age from living reefs through to ancient fossil reefs, providing an important source of information on the natural history of Oceania.

Criterion (vii): Superlative natural phenomena or natural beauty: The tropical lagoons and coral reefs of New Caledonia are considered to be some of the most beautiful reef systems in the world due to their wide variety of shapes and forms within a comparatively small area. This ranges from extensive double barrier systems, offshore reefs and coral islands, to the near-shore reticulate reef formations in the west coast zone. The richness and diversity of landscapes and coastal backdrops gives a distinctive aesthetic appeal of exceptional quality. This beauty continues below the surface with dramatic displays of coral diversity, massive coral structures, together with arches, caves and major fissures in the reefs.

Criterion (ix): Ongoing biological and ecological processes: The reef complex within this serial property is globally unique in that it is "free-standing" in the ocean and encircles the island of New Caledonia, providing a variety of different kinds of oceanographic exposure, including both warm and cold currents. The coral reef complex has a great diversity of forms including all the major reef types from fringing reefs to atolls, as well as associated ecosystems in both coastal and oceanic situations. Extending over important oceanic gradients, it is one of the planet's best examples of the ecological and biological processes underlying tropical lagoon and coral reef ecosystems, themselves one of the most ancient and complex ecosystem types.

Criterion (x): Biological diversity and threatened species: The property is a marine site of exceptional diversity with a continuum of habitats from mangroves to seagrasses and a wide range of reef forms. The barrier reefs and atolls in New Caledonia form one of the three most extensive reef systems in the world, and together with the reefs of Fiji, are the most significant coral reefs in Oceania. They are the location for the world’s most diverse concentration of reef structures, 146 types based on a global classification system, and they equal or even surpass the much larger Great Barrier Reef in coral and fish diversity. They provide habitat to a number of threatened fish, turtles, and marine mammals, including the third largest population of dugongs in the world.

Integrity

The serial property comprises six marine clusters which are also protected by marine and terrestrial buffer zones that are not part of the inscribed property. It includes all the key areas that are essential for maintaining its natural beauty and the long term conservation of its remarkable reef diversity, and it is of sufficient size to maintain associated biological and ecological processes. The property still displays intact ecosystems with top predators, and a large number and diversity of large fish.

Protection and management requirements

The property is currently protected by fisheries legislation, which is being further improved, and co-management arrangements with the Kanak communities are currently being established for all clusters. Management plans are currently being prepared for all clusters with full involvement of stakeholders. Continued efforts to protect and manage the property and its surroundings are required to maintain the present intactness of the coral reef ecosystems. Protecting and managing large areas in the form of no-take zones and proactive management of water quality and fisheries regulations will help maintain reef resilience in the face of climate change. Enhanced surveillance and monitoring are required to address potential impacts from fishing and mining and, to a lesser extent, from agriculture and aquaculture. Tourism is likely to increase in the future and needs to be well planned and managed. Sustainable financing strategies are required to ensure the necessary equipment, human and financial resources for the long term management of the property.

Links
Conservatoire d'espaces naturels de Nouvelle-Calédonie (Youtube Channel)

Conservatoire d'espaces naturels de Nouvelle-Calédonie

Protectedplanet.net

Activities 1
World Heritage Marine Programme
News  19
New Caledonia Launches its First Reef Resilience Strategy
20 February 2024
How Belize is pioneering climate resilience in world’s second largest reef
21 April 2023
Ningaloo Coast releases world’s first community-led resilience strategy to adapt World Heritage reef to climate change
30 March 2023
Associations and management committees are taking part in UNESCO's eDNA campaign in the Lagoons of New Caledonia (France)
1 March 2023
More add
Events  3
Protecting UNESCO marine World Heritage through scientific research
30 Nov 2020 - 31 Dec 2020
Building Leadership for Climate Adaptation of Coral Reefs
5 Jul 2019 - 5 Jul 2019
Photo Exhibit: Coral Reefs on UNESCO's World Heritage List
2 Oct 2017 - 6 Dec 2017
Media
play_arrow Lagoons of New Caledonia: Reef Diversity and Associated ... (UNESCO/NHK)
play_arrow Passion Lagon
France
Date of Inscription: 2008
Criteria: (vii)(ix)(x)
Property : 1,574,300 ha

Buffer zone: 1,287,100 ha
Dossier: 1115
Serial: yes

Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2011
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026