World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Historic Walled Town of Cuenca
Historic Walled Town of Cuenca
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Historic Walled Town of Cuenca

Built by the Moors in a defensive position at the heart of the Caliphate of Cordoba, Cuenca is an unusually well-preserved medieval fortified city. Conquered by the Castilians in the 12th century, it became a royal town and bishopric endowed with important buildings, such as Spain's first Gothic cathedral, and the famous casas colgadas (hanging houses), suspended from sheer cliffs overlooking the Huécar river. Taking full advantage of its location, the city towers above the magnificent countryside.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Cuenca is a municipality located in central Spain, 170 km south-east of Madrid. The historic walled town stretches over 23 hectares, with an important monumental heritage and a consolidated cultural tradition. Built by the Islamic rulers in a defensive position at the outer fringes of the Caliphate of Córdoba, Cuenca is an unusually well-preserved medieval fortified city. The site is dominated by the upper town, developed on the site of Islamic fortress after its conquest by the Castilians in the 12th century. It then became a royal town and bishopric endowed with important buildings.

This is the archetype of the fortress-town, and the part that gives Cuenca its individual character. The “Castillo” quarter is a small suburb just outside the walls, with some remains of the Islamic fortress. Within the upper town there is a wealth of historic religious buildings from the medieval, renaissance, and Baroque periods, notably the 12th century cathedral, built on the site of the former Great Mosque and the first Gothic cathedral in Spain. Taking full advantage of its location, the city towers rise above the magnificent countryside.

No account of the upper town is complete without references to the so-called “Hanging Houses” (casas colgadas). These private houses near the Episcopal Palace were built in the later medieval period on the spectacular steep bluffs overlooking the bend of the Huecar river. Most of them were rebuilt in the 16th century in their present narrow, high form, with two or three rooms on each of three or more floors.

The historic quarter of Cuenca is an outstanding example of the medieval fortress-town. Other examples exist in Spain (Toledo) and in Italy (Urbino, Orvieto) and France (Carcassonne). The special qualities of Cuenca relate to the intact nature of its townscape, as a result of a long period of economic stagnation and social deprivation, and to its dramatic contribution to the natural landscape.

The Old Town of Cuenca has preserved its original townscape remarkably intact along with many excellent examples of religious and secular architecture from the 12th to 18th centuries. It is also exceptional because the walled town blends into and enhances the fine rural and natural landscape in which it is situated.

Criterion (ii): The Old Town of Cuenca is an outstanding example of the medieval fortress town that has preserved its original townscape remarkably intact along with many excellent examples of religious and secular architecture from the 12th to 18th centuries.

Criterion (v): Cuenca is also exceptional because the walled town blends into and enhances the fine rural and natural landscape within which it is situated.

Integrity

The boundaries of the property include the walled town and its suburbs. The walled town of Cuenca shows an integrity of its cultural heritage. The conservation level, restoration works, and the rehabilitation policies have made possible an adequate level of integrity in the historic town. The impact of deterioration processes is controlled. One of the most important threats is the tourism pressure, including affluence of visitors, commercial activities in public spaces and traffic. Other issues are run down edifices, excessive building renovations, and decreasing population numbers due to the lack of facilities and insufficient mobility.

Some restoration works have been carried out very respectfully and have maintained the integrity of the monuments. All reconstructions in historic buildings are made on the basis of complete and detailed documentation. This has been done thanks to the work of the different administrations (Town Hall of Cuenca and the Department of Culture of the Autonomous Community).

Authenticity

The importance of the upper town lies not so much in its individual buildings, though many of these are of outstanding architectural and artistic quality, as in the townscape that they create when looked at as a group, on the fortified site dominating the river valleys. This feature gives Cuenca its special character and quality. In the light of the fact that the significance of Cuenca lies in its overall townscape as an historic ensemble, it may fairly be asserted that the authenticity is very high. The protection arrangements and the conservation strategies are considered sufficiently effective to respect the authenticity of the historic walled town of Cuenca.

Protection and management requirements

The historic zone of Cuenca, which was declared a “Picturesque Site” in 1963, is designated as a Historic Ensemble under the provisions of Law No 16/1985 on the Spanish Historic Heritage. The Royal Board of the City of Cuenca was created to operate as a permanent collegiate body promoting and coordinating all action, so the current management system is sufficiently effective. The legal framework, which encompasses Cuenca´s heritage management, consists of a wide array of regulations issued by different administrative levels. The Spanish administration provides a state law which defines the main protection figures, addresses the planification of historic cities and other issues regarding international conventions linked with heritage protection. The regulations promulgated by the Government of Castilla La Mancha deal with specific protection levels as well as territorial and urban planning activity. The historic town of Cuenca is included in the Register of Cultural Interest Sites with the category of Historic Site. Furthermore, there is a General Urban Zoning Scheme, and a Special Scheme for the Planning and Improvement Plan and Protection of Cuenca’s Old Quarter and its Hoces (Special Plan). Changes need to be made in respect of urban planning regimes, and the specific planning and management bodies taking part in the relevant processes through the Royal Board Consortium.

Although great strides have been made, the use of traditional construction materials and construction sizes will be further improved due to the continued valorisation of the urban landscape. In line with the recommendations of the Special Plan, it is also necessary to regulate run-down buildings, excessive building renovations, and the decrease of population due to lack of facilities and insufficient mobility. The old walled town of Cuenca needs measures to improve urban regulation, rehabilitation programmes, public transportation alternatives, and pedestrian accessibility. Control has increased through the maintenance of pre-existing vernacular structures and improving their residential and commercial use.

Links
Consortium of the city of Cuenca (in Spanish)

Ministry of Culture and Sports (in Spanish)

 View photos from OUR PLACE the World Heritage collection

Cuenca - World Heritage Cities in Spain (in Spanish)

Municipality of Cuenca (in Spanish)

Activities 1
World Heritage Cities Programme
News  1
Google and UNESCO announce alliance to provide virtual visits of several World Heritage sites
3 December 2009
Events  1
5th Edition of The Heritage Night
17 Sep 2022 - 17 Sep 2022
Media
play_arrow Historic Walled Town of Cuenca (UNESCO/NHK)
Spain
Date of Inscription: 1996
Criteria: (ii)(v)
Property : 22.79 ha

Buffer zone: 170.49 ha
Dossier: 781
Serial: yes

Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

1998
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026