World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Cathedral of Notre-Dame, Former Abbey of ...
Cathedral of Notre-Dame, Former Abbey of Saint-Rémi and Palace of Tau, Reims
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Cathedral of Notre-Dame, Former Abbey of Saint-Rémi and Palace of Tau, Reims

The outstanding handling of new architectural techniques in the 13th century, and the harmonious marriage of sculptural decoration with architecture, has made Notre-Dame in Reims one of the masterpieces of Gothic art. The former abbey still has its beautiful 9th-century nave, in which lie the remains of Archbishop St Rémi (440–533), who instituted the Holy Anointing of the kings of France. The former archiepiscopal palace known as the Tau Palace, which played an important role in religious ceremonies, was almost entirely rebuilt in the 17th century.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Located in the Grand Est region, in the Marne Department, the Cathedral, the Palace of Tau and the Abbey of Saint-Rémi of Reims are closely linked to the history of the French monarchy, and hence, more generally, to the history of France.

The Cathedral of Notre-Dame is a masterpiece of Gothic art: it bears witness to the remarkable mastery of the new architectural techniques acquired in the course of the 13th century, and achieves a harmonious marriage of architecture with sculpted decoration. The perfection of the cathedral's architecture and group of sculptures is so great that it influenced many later buildings, particularly in Germany. More than just a decoration, the sculptures of Reims Cathedral are an integral part of the architectural composition of the building. Reflecting both the traditions of Île-de-France and the minor arts of the Champagne region, these sculptures have a monumentality and grace inspired by the art of goldsmiths who worked silver or gold. The smiling faces of the western facade, the magnificence of the composition of the Coronation of the Virgin (above the central portal), or the grave nobility of other figures like that of Elizabeth in the scene depicting the Visitation have attained universal celebrity. The original well-balanced harmony has been preserved as has the wealth of ornamentation, carvings and stained glass, an evident testimony to the twenty-five royal coronations that took place there.

The Palace of Tau adjoining the cathedral, once residence of the archbishop, holds the memory of the coronation ceremony.  The king, exercising his right of lodging, prayed in the Palatine Chapel, slept in the palace, and feasted after his coronation in the banquet hall. The beautiful 13th century Palatine Chapel and the 15th century banquet hall have remained intact.  The façade of the Palace of Tau boasts a beautiful 17th century order, and it currently houses the Musée de l’Oeuvre where treasures and artwork linked to the coronation ceremonies are displayed. 

The former Royal Benedictine Abbey of Saint-Rémi, founded in the 8th century, features a majestic 18th century architecture, with a chapter house still containing fine Romanesque sculptures.

The abbey, a pilgrimage church built around the tomb of Saint Remi, is an outstanding example of medieval architecture: it was the largest Romanesque building in northern France before being transformed with spectacular sobriety during the Gothic era. It was closely involved in the ritual of the coronations: the ceremonies began and ended at the abbey, conservatory of the Holy Ampulla containing the chrism dating back to the baptism of Clovis by Bishop Rémi and used for the coronation of kings. The abbey is now a museum of heritage and history of Reims and its region.

Criterion (i): The Cathedral of Notre-Dame of Reims is a masterpiece of Gothic art due to the outstanding handling of new architectural techniques in the 13th century and the harmonious marriage of architecture and sculptured ornamentation.  

Criterion (ii): The perfection of the architecture and sculptural work of these buildings had a strong influence on later buildings in Europe.

Criterion (vi): The cathedral, the archiepiscopal palace and the former Abbey of Saint-Rémi are directly linked to the history of the French monarchy and hence the history of France. These places involved in the coronation ceremony recall the balance between public authority and sacred function that has made French royalty a political model throughout Europe.

Integrity

The Cathedral, the Palace of Tau and the Abbey of Saint-Rémi of Rheims constitute coronation places in their entirety. Although parts of these buildings, which were badly damaged during the First World War, have undergone major restorations, the geography and the ritual of coronation can be evoked or represented there. The cathedral’s sculpture and stained glass still bear witness to these celebrations.  These buildings are part of the urban fabric of the great medieval compound of the13th century, in which we distinguish the traces of the ancient road network. The alternance between post-war reconstructed buildings in an eclectic spirit, contemporary buildings and restored old buildings characterizes the area surrounding these monuments.

Authenticity

The history of the Cathedral of Notre-Dame of Reims entails eight centuries of technical or artistic innovations, from the 13th century to its restoration after the First World War, which provided it with a remarkable reinforced concrete framework. Although Reims Cathedral has unfortunately lost part of its original stained glass, it still has some of the most remarkable examples of Gothic stained glass. For the preservation of this heritage, the State has a double policy of stained-glass restoration and support for its creation. Thus, some of these medieval windows have regained their former splendor while, at the same time, renowned artists, such as Marc Chagall, have practiced their art in the cathedral.

The first episcopal palace, known as the Palace of Tau, played an important role in religious ceremonies; it was almost entirely rebuilt during the 17th century. By breaking the Holy Ampulla, the French Revolution interrupted the tradition of coronations, which was resumed one last time for the coronation of Charles X, in 1825. Successive restorations until today have enabled the implementation of technological innovations respectful of the authenticity of the buildings.

Protection and management requirements

The three buildings forming the property are protected under the Heritage Code (Historic Monuments).

Property of the State, the Cathedral is listed in its entirely as a Historic Monument since 1862 (the Palace of Tau since 1886). It is legally assigned to Catholic worship. The Palace of Tau is managed by the Centre des monuments nationaux, a public institution under the supervision of the Ministry of Culture, which ensures its opening to the public. Annual and multi-annual programmes ensure the monuments’ maintenance and restoration; they are either implemented directly by the State or carried out under its scientific and technical control. The Abbey of Saint-Rémi is owned by the city of Reims; its maintenance and restoration are the responsibility of the municipality under the scientific and technical control of the State. The redevelopment of the forecourt helps to improve access and circulation around the monument.

The local urban plan, preserving the urban fabric and establishing view cones of the cathedral, ensures the preservation of the close relationship linking the building to the city. The Saint-Rémi district is a Remarkable Heritage Site, the objective of which is the protection of the buildings and the enhancement of the public space and monumental perspectives in a project and urban renewal approach. Another Remarkable Heritage Site that will integrate the Cathedral district is under study and will serve as a basis for defining a buffer zone. The management plan for the property is under preparation.

Links
Saint-Remi Museum (in French)

palais-tau.monuments-nationaux.fr

cathedrale-reims.monuments-nationaux.fr

Activities 1
World Heritage Cities Programme
Media
play_arrow Cathedral of Notre-Dame, Former Abbey of Saint-Rémi and ... (UNESCO/NHK)
France
Date of Inscription: 1991
Criteria: (i)(ii)(vi)
Property : 4.16 ha

Dossier: 601
Department of Marne, Champagne Ardenne Region
N49 15 14.4 E4 2 2.4
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2000 1999 1998
Protections
by other conservation instruments

1 protection / 1 element

2003 Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage (1 element)

Scribing tradition in French timber framing

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026