World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Ancient City of Ping Yao
Ancient City of Ping Yao
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Ancient City of Ping Yao

Ping Yao is an exceptionally well-preserved example of a traditional Han Chinese city, founded in the 14th century. Its urban fabric shows the evolution of architectural styles and town planning in Imperial China over five centuries. Of special interest are the imposing buildings associated with banking, for which Ping Yao was the major centre for the whole of China in the 19th and early 20th centuries.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The Ancient City of Ping Yao is a well-preserved ancient county-level city in China. Located in Ping Yao County, central Shanxi Province, the property includes three parts: the entire area within the walls of Ping Yao, Shuanglin Temple 6 kilometers southwest of the county seat, and Zhenguo Temple 12 kilometers northeast of the county seat. The Ancient City of Ping Yao well retains the historic form of the county-level cities of the Han people in Central China from the 14th to 20th century.

Founded in the 14th century and covering an area of 225 hectares, the Ancient City of Ping Yao is a complete building complex including ancient walls, streets and lanes, shops, dwellings and temples. Its layout reflects perfectly the developments in architectural style and urban planning of the Han cities over more than five centuries. Particularly, from the 19th century to the early 20th century, the Ancient City of Ping Yao was a financial center for the whole of China. The nearly 4,000 existing shops and traditional dwellings in the town which are grand in form and exquisite in ornament bear witness to Ping Yao’s economic prosperity over a century. With more than 2,000 existing painted sculptures made in the Ming and Qing dynasties, Shuanglin Temple has been reputed as an “oriental art gallery of painted sculptures”. Wanfo Shrine, the main shrine of Zhenguo Temple, dating back to the Five Dynasties, is one of China’s earliest and most precious timber structure buildings in existence.

The Ancient City of Ping Yao is an outstanding example of Han cities in the Ming and Qing dynasties (from the 14th to 20th century). It retains all the Han city features, provides a complete picture of the cultural, social, economic and religious development in Chinese history, and it is of great value for studying the social form, economic structure, military defense, religious belief, traditional thinking, traditional ethics and dwelling form.

Criterion (ii): The townscape of Ancient City of Ping Yao excellently reflects the evolution of architectural styles and town planning in Imperial China over five centuries with contributions from different ethnicities and other parts of China.

Criterion (iii): The Ancient City of Ping Yao was a financial center in China from the 19th century to the early 20th century. The business shops and traditional dwellings in the city are historical witnesses to the economic prosperity of the Ancient City of Ping Yao in this period.

Criterion (iv): The Ancient City of Ping Yao is an outstanding example of the Han Chinese city of the Ming and Qing Dynasties (14th-20th centuries) that has retained all its features to an exceptional degree.

Integrity

Within Ancient City of Ping Yao’s property boundary, the heritage information and overall material and spiritual values have been well preserved. The urban plan and layout of the county-level cities of the Han people in Central China from the 14th to 20th century are well retained, the attributes carrying the heritage values including the city walls, streets and lanes, stores, dwellings and temples remain intact, and all the information that reflects the cultural, social, economic and religious development in this period have been well preserved. The spirit and culture of the heritage property have been well inherited and continued. All the above have so far not been destroyed or much affected by modern development.

Authenticity

Through over five centuries of continuous evolution and development, the Ancient City of Ping Yao with its associated temples of Shuanglin and Zhenguo has preserved authentically the elements and features that reflect the Han cities from the 14th to 20th century, including the overall layout, architectural style, building materials, construction craftsmanship and traditional technology, as well as the internal relations between the overall cityscape and the elements. Ancient City of Ping Yao truly reflects the traditional dwelling form and lifestyle of the Han people as well as the materialized features of trade and finance. It is an ideal place to research traditional Han culture.

Protection and management requirements

Ancient City of Pingyao was designated a National Historical and Cultural City by the State Council in 1986. The protection and management of the property have been in accordance with the 1982 Law of the People’s Republic of China on the Protection of Cultural Relics and the Implementation Regulations of Law of the People’s Republic of China on the Protection of Cultural Relics (amended 1991), the Law of the People’s Republic of China on Urban-rural Planning, as well as international conventions including the Convention Concerning the Protection of World Cultural and Natural Heritage. At the same time, in order to permanently preserve and sustainably use the Ancient City of Ping Yao, the Management Committee of World Cultural Heritage-Ancient City of Ping Yao (the special protection and management body), has been established, with offices under it to implement a series of laws, regulations and plans for the protection and management of Ancient City of Ping Yao, including the Regulations on the Protection of the Ancient City of Ping Yao and Detailed Plan for the Protection of the Ancient City of Ping Yao.

The Outstanding Universal Value of the property and all its attributes are under authentic and integrated conservation by making and implementing conservation and management plans, specific measures for intervention and maintenance of the fabric, and the improvement of the heritage setting. The site management body will strictly implement protection and management regulations, effectively control the development and construction activities in the heritage areas, curb the negative effects of various development pressures on the property, coordinate the demands of different stakeholders, and rationally and effectively maintain the balance between heritage conservation, tourism development and urban construction. The research, interpretation and communication of heritage value will be strengthened, and the roles of the property as a spiritual home and for cultural continuity will be realized, so that a sustainable and harmonious relationship between urban conservation and development of the historic city can be achieved.

Links
Official website page (in Chinese only)

Activities 2
World Heritage Earthen Architecture Programme (WHEAP)
Conservation and revitalisation programme of Ancient City of Ping Yao (China)
News  2
China's Pingyao forms yoke of friendship with Provins of France
16 September 2005
World Heritage Committee Inscribes 46 New Sites on World Heritage List
7 December 1997
Media
play_arrow Ancient City of Ping Yao (UNESCO/NHK)
China
Date of Inscription: 1997
Criteria: (ii)(iii)(iv)
Property : 245.62 ha

Buffer zone: 95.99 ha
Dossier: 812
Serial: yes

Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026