World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
São Francisco Square in the Town of São ...
São Francisco Square in the Town of São Cristóvão
Description
Maps
Documents
Indicators
São Francisco Square in the Town of São Cristóvão

São Francisco Square, in the town of São Cristovão, is a quadrilateral open space surrounded by substantial early buildings such as São Francisco Church and convent, the Church and Santa Casa da Misericórdia, the Provincial Palace and the associated houses of different historical periods surrounding the Square. This monumental ensemble, together with the surrounding 18th- and 19th- century houses, creates an urban landscape which reflects the history of the town since its origin. The Franciscan complex is an example of the typical architecture of the religious order developed in north-eastern Brazil.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The São Francisco Square, in the town of São Cristóvão, in the North East of Brazil, is an exceptional and homogeneous monumental ensemble made up of public and private buildings representing the period during which the Portuguese and Spanish crowns were united. The São Francisco Square constitutes a coherent and harmonious ensemble which merges the patterns of land occupation followed by Portugal and the norms defined for towns established by Spain. Established in accordance with the length and width required by Act IX of the Philippine Ordinances, this square incorporates the concept of a Plaza Mayor as employed in the colonial cities of Hispanic America, while at the same time inserted in the urban pattern of a Portuguese colonial town in a tropical landscape. Hence, it may be considered a remarkable symbiosis of the urban planning of cities of Portugal and Spain. Relevant civil and religious institutional buildings, the main one being the complex of the Church and Convent of São Francisco, surround the square.

Criterion (ii): The São Francisco Square represents the outcome of the merging of the modes of territorial occupation and settlement of Portugal and Spain according to which urban settlements were established in their respective colonial empires. This property exhibits an important fusion of urban models, which occurred during the unification under one crown of two rival Empires.

Criterion (iv): The São Francisco Square is an outstanding example of harmonious and coherent architectural ensemble that has been preserved as a social landmark of the town and a place for important cultural and social manifestations. It shows a paradigm of integrated rational town planning and adaptation to the specificities of the local topography.

Integrity

The integrity of the property is sufficient as the attributes necessary to convey its Outstanding Universal Value are encompassed in its boundaries. These attributes are intact and complete and are not under threat.

Authenticity

The Square and associated buildings within the nominated property are authentic in terms of the way they portray their historical and social significance within the life of the town. Works to the Square itself have retained its characteristics while improving the infrastructure, amenity and security for pedestrians.

Protection and management requirements

The property and its buffer zone enjoy sufficient and adequate legal protection that has been improved throughout the years to ensure their proper conservation. The architectural and urban ensemble was protected by the Federal government by procedure 785-T-67 of 31 January 1967, in the framework of Decree - Law 25 of 30 November 1937. At the State level, the ensemble was registered as Historic Monument by Decree Law 94 in 1938, supported by Article 134 of the new State Constitution. In 1967, the Architectural, Urban and Landscape ensemble of São Cristóvão was registered on the Archaeological, Ethnographic and Landscape Protection Book, on page 10, number 40. The buffer zone corresponds to the historic centre of the town of São Cristóvão and is protected at state and national levels.

Appropriate management policies are in place, among which an Urban Plan devised with the participation of stakeholders, including the local population and religious orders. However, the management structure and procedures could be improved by the development and implementation of a management plan for the property and the increase, diversification and improved skills of the staff involved in it. The Instituto do Patrimônio Histórico e Artístico Nacional (IPHAN), through its regional office, is responsible for the physical conservation of the property, while the local government is responsible for land use and compliance with planning regulations.

Links
Google Arts & Culture: Story

Activities 1
World Heritage Cities Programme
News  2
International Day for Monuments and Sites 2021 - Complex Pasts: Diverse Futures
16 April 2021
World Heritage Committee inscribes three new cultural sites, three natural sites and one extension on World Heritage List
1 August 2010
Brazil
Date of Inscription: 2010
Criteria: (ii)(iv)
Property : 3 ha

Buffer zone: 2,500 ha
Dossier: 1272rev
S11 0 49.16 W37 12 19.349
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
Protections
by other conservation instruments

1 protection / 1 element

Biosphere Reserves (1 element)

Mata Atlântica

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026