World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Royal Monastery of Santa María de Guadalupe
Royal Monastery of Santa María de Guadalupe
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Royal Monastery of Santa María de Guadalupe

The monastery is an outstanding repository of four centuries of Spanish religious architecture. It symbolizes two significant events in world history that occurred in 1492: the Reconquest of the Iberian peninsula by the Catholic Kings and Christopher Columbus' arrival in the Americas. Its famous statue of the Virgin became a powerful symbol of the Christianization of much of the New World.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The Royal Monastery of Santa María de Guadalupe is located in the province of Cáceres (Autonomous Community of Extremadura, Spain) at a location of great beauty, overlooking a valley surrounded by high mountains. The town of Guadalupe, built around the Monastery, whose foundation dates back to 1337, offers in its medieval buildings a unique beauty that reflects the traditional architecture in an urban context.

It is an exceptional example of an ensemble comprised of widely differing architectural styles, including in particular the 14th- to 15th-century Mudéjar church and cloister. The following architecture from different periods is worth underscoring: the Basilica (main church) or Templo Mayor – with a façade notable for its Mudéjar works, its doors ornamented with finely-worked bronze plaques, the interior nave and two side aisles with fine ornamented vaulting, and many richly decorated tombs and altars. The sacristy built between 1638 and 1647is abundantly decorated and best known for the series of paintings by Zurbarán and wall paintings that highlight the austere lines of its architecture. The Chapel of Santa Catalina of Alejandría, a square building that links the Sacristy with the Reliquaries Chapel, has an octagonal cupola lit by a lantern, contains some outstanding 17th-century tombs, and houses many elaborate reliquaries and other works of art in its arcaded alcoves. The Camarín de la Virgen, a small octagonal building situated behind the presbytery of the basilica is amply decorated in Baroque style. Of special interest is the upper storey, the “Chamber of the Virgin” proper, in which the vaults are richly decorated in plaster and stucco and the walls covered with paintings, among them nine by Luca Giordano. It houses the famous statue of the Virgin of Guadalupe on a magnificently ornamented throne. The cloister was constructed in brick in the Mudéjar tradition and painted in white and red. The small chapel in the centre dates from 1405, and there is an impressive portal ca. 1520-24 in Plateresque style. The Gothic cloister has galleries on three sides with three tiers of arches, and the New Church, in modified Baroque style, has three naves.

The site has played a leading role in the history of medieval and modern Spain, being linked to the Crown of Castile from the reign of Alfonso XI and the other Peninsular kingdoms – particularly after the conquest of Granada, which resulted in the unification of all territories, the emergence of the Modern State in Europe, the end of the period of the Reconquest, and the discovery of the New World.

Its influence in the evangelisation of the discovered land has been enormous, spreading sanctuaries, institutions, and offerings in honour of the Virgin of Guadalupe, whose validity and relevance is still alive. The monastery was also a leading cultural centre for workshops and scientific activity: a centre which spread knowledge of botany and medicine through the Medical School of Guadalupe, first mentioned in 1451, or through the School of Surgery. It was also a centre where techniques were applied and experimented in luxury goods and music. This relevance is today portrayed in specific museums within the monastery. 

Criterion (iv): The Monastery of Guadalupe is of exceptional interest as an ensemble of religious architecture spanning some six centuries.

Criterion (vi): The Monastery symbolises two significant events in world history that occurred in the same year, 1492, namely the final expulsion of the Muslim power from the Iberian Peninsula and the discovery of the American continent by Christopher Columbus. Its influence on the evangelisation of the Americas was substantial; the statue of Santa María de Guadalupe became a powerful symbol of the Christianisation of much of the New World. The Monastery was, and remains, a centre of pilgrimage for the Western world and Latin America. 

Integrity

The property covers an area of 1.10 ha, with a 44 ha buffer zone and contains all the necessary elements to convey its Outstanding Universal Value. Material integrity has been largely preserved given that the monastery has been in continuous use since its construction. Restoration and maintenance works have been carried out continuously since 1908 but no interventions have caused alterations to the monument.

Currently inhabited and governed by the Franciscan community, the monastery retains all its heritage richness and strength, welcoming many visitors, tourists, and pilgrims all year round and during particular holidays, and therefore maintaining its functional integrity. 

Authenticity

Like any religious establishment that has been in use constantly since its construction, the monastery has buildings of different styles and periods. Inhabited for more than four centuries by the same Order, the Order of St. Jerome, it has undergone restorations and reconstruction works. However, the ensemble retains its original form and appearance. The most recent restoration works have met modern conservation standards.

The Franciscan community, with the necessary support of national, regional, and provincial institutions, has maintained, in addition, an interesting cultural work through the study and publication of its archives and the formation of a large library well catalogued and used by researchers. 

Protection and management requirements

The Royal Monastery of Guadalupe belongs jointly to the Archbishopric of Toledo, the Government of Spain, and Bética Province of the Franciscan Order, as stipulated in the Royal Ordinance of 20 May 1908 and 22 May 1915, and the canonical Decree of 8 August 1908.

The Law 16/1985 on Spanish Historical Heritage legally protects the property and the Law 2/1999 on Historical and Cultural Heritage of Extremadura. The Royal Decree as a National Historic and Artistic Monument in 1879 was expanded to the whole of its buildings in 1929. In addition, the monastery, located in the town of Guadalupe, was declared a Historical-Artistical Complex in 1943.

Direct management of the property is the responsibility of the regional Government of Extremadura in partnership with the Franciscan community of Guadalupe. The management is carried out according to a Master Plan developed in 2006, which rationalises the interventions and contains a detailed study of the needs and conditions of the different buildings. In addition to setting objectives and methodology, the Plan is a valuable tool to optimise resources and channel investments from administrations (regional and central governments), the Franciscan community, and private entities involved.

The Town Council of Guadalupe is responsible for preparing and revising the General Municipal Plan for the urban planning of the municipality, including a Special Protection Plan for the Historical-Artistical Complex and the establishment of a buffer zone.

The Royal Monastery has the subsidiary protection of Integrated Rehabilitation Area of Guadalupe, an office under the authority of the Directorate General of Cultural Heritage of the Department of Education and Culture of the regional government, which has a priority task of safeguarding cultural properties in the region, ensuring compliance with current national and regional legislation and maintaining the Outstanding Universal Value of the property. In order to achieve these goals, it has organised new offices for heritage site management.

Links
Instagram page

Facebook page

Tourism in Guadalupe

Tourism in Extremadura

Ministry of Culture and Sports (in Spanish)

Monasterio de Guadalupe (in Spanish)

Media
play_arrow Royal Monastery of Santa María de Guadalupe (UNESCO/NHK)
Spain
Date of Inscription: 1993
Criteria: (iv)(vi)
Property : 1.1 ha

Buffer zone: 43.65 ha
Dossier: 665
Province of Cáceres, Autonomous Community of Extremadura
N39 27 10.26 W5 19 39
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
Protections
by other conservation instruments

1 protection / 1 element

Geoparks (1 element)

Villuercas-Ibores-Jara UNESCO Global Geopark

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026