World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Tugendhat Villa in Brno
Tugendhat Villa in Brno
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Tugendhat Villa in Brno

The Tugendhat Villa in Brno, designed by the architect Mies van der Rohe, is an outstanding example of the international style in the modern movement in architecture as it developed in Europe in the 1920s. Its particular value lies in the application of innovative spatial and aesthetic concepts that aim to satisfy new lifestyle needs by taking advantage of the opportunities afforded by modern industrial production.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief Synthesis

The Tugendhat Villa is situated in Brno, in the district of Černá Pole, in the south of South Moravia in the Czech Republic. The villa was designed by the architect Ludwig Mies van der Rohe and built on a commission from Grete and Frits Tugendhat, members of rich industrial families of Brno, in 1929–1930.The prominent German architect Ludwig Mies van der Rohe designed not only the villa but also its furniture and the adjacent garden. Moreover, Mies van der Rohe closely supervised the execution of the building project to achieve perfection.

The Tugendhat Villa in Brno is a pioneering work of modern 20th century residential architecture. It embodies innovative spatial and aesthetic concepts that were developed in housing at that time to meet the new needs arising from the modern way of life, by taking advantage of the opportunities afforded by modern industrial production. Designing the interior residential area as a space without limits determines the architecture of the Tugendhat Villa. The villa also reflects the desire of Mies van der Rohe to create an architecture concentrating on the essential and aiming at the purest expression in each detail as well as in the whole. A winter garden occupies almost two-thirds of the entire floor space of the main floor. Subtle divisions made of rosewood and onyx separate spaces of this same floor, such as the reception hall, the music corner and the library. The living area has large windows and is directly joined to the terrace, which has a wide stairway leading down to the garden. The main structure of the house is made of reinforced concrete slabs supported by steel beams, some of them being polished. The basement includes mechanical equipment of the house, in particular for the central heating and air conditioning, as well as for the electrically operated large windows.

The Tugendhat Villa in Brno is one of the most original projects completed by Mies van der Rohe. He was able to fully implement his design in accordance with his intentions due to the ideal cooperation with the highly cultured Tugendhat family. The furniture was designed by the architect and some pieces were intended for specific locations. There is no other similar architectural work of the European production by Mies van der Rohe that has been preserved with such integrity.

Criterion (ii): The German architect Mies van der Rohe applied the radical new concepts of the Modern Movement triumphantly to the Tugendhat Villa to the design of residential buildings.

Criterion (iv): Architecture was revolutionized by the Modern Movement in the 1920s and the work of Mies van der Rohe, epitomized by the Tugendhat Villa, played a major role in its worldwide diffusion and acceptance.

Integrity

The main components of the property, namely the house and the garden, are still present and are located within the boundaries of the property. The protective zone of the urban heritage reservation serves as the buffer zone of the Tugendhat Villa. The views of the villa and those from the villa of the town have been preserved. All risks of the erection of buildings that could compromise the visual field of the villa are kept under control by the bodies responsible for heritage preservation. 

Authenticity

The Tugendhat Villa in Brno meets the criteria of authenticity. In spite of various alterations in the past and the loss of its original function, the present form of the villa, the materials and items of technical equipment of the villa are the same as in the design of the architect. The authenticity is underlined by the fact that the villa serves as a house-museum. The villa was used as a monument of modern architecture. In addition to regular maintenance over the years, the work done between 2010 and 2012 helped to restore its original appearance of 1930, the year when it was finished; this was achieved by the restoration of the finishes, plaster, wood, stone and metal, as well as by the repair of structural elements such as the slabs and the concrete walls. The restoration work has been carried out in accordance with the strict international conservation criteria with the use of period assembly and building techniques. The restoration was based on detailed research that has deepened the knowledge of its original architectural details.

Protection and management requirements

The Tugendhat Villa in Brno is protected under Act No. 20/1987 Coll. on State Heritage Preservation as amended and it is designated a national cultural heritage property. Hence, it enjoys the highest degree of legal protection as regards heritage preservation. The protective zone of the urban heritage reservation of Brno has been delimited as a buffer zone of World Heritage property and its preservation provisions protect the surrounding area of the property. Any actions that may affect these both types of conservation areas must be authorized by the appropriate state or local heritage preservation authorities. The villa has been proposed as a viewpoint in the Brno Land Use Plan.

The City of Brno is the owner and administrator of the Tugendhat Villa, and is responsible for the maintenance, protection, and promotion of the property. The villa is open to the public for guided tours. The site also hosts various cultural events. Financial resources for maintenance, conservation and the presentation of the site are allocated from the town budget. In 2006, the Tugendhat Villa Foundation has been established with the aim to support the conservation and the presentation of the property.

The management plan of the property is in place and it is scheduled to be updated regularly. In this document, there are monitored potential risks for the property. Since the inscription of the villa on the World Heritage List, annual monitoring reports have been prepared at the national level to serve the property manager, the Ministry of Culture, the National Heritage Institute and other agencies involved as well.

Links
Villa Tugendhat

News  1
World Heritage Committee Inscribes 31 New Sites on the World Heritage List
13 December 2001
Media
play_arrow Tugendhat Villa in Brno (UNESCO/NHK)
Czechia
Date of Inscription: 2001
Criteria: (ii)(iv)
Property : 0.73 ha

Buffer zone: 2,824.8999 ha
Dossier: 1052
South Moravian Region
N49 12 25.86 E16 36 57.8
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
Protections
by other conservation instruments

1 protection / 1 element

Second Protocol to the 1954 Hague Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict (1 element)

The Tugendhat Villa in Brno

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026