World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Yellowstone National Park
Yellowstone National Park
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Yellowstone National Park

The vast natural forest of Yellowstone National Park covers nearly 9,000 km2 ; 96% of the park lies in Wyoming, 3% in Montana and 1% in Idaho. Yellowstone contains half of all the world's known geothermal features, with more than 10,000 examples. It also has the world's largest concentration of geysers (more than 300 geyers, or two thirds of all those on the planet). Established in 1872, Yellowstone is equally known for its wildlife, such as grizzly bears, wolves, bison and wapitis.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief Synthesis

Yellowstone National Park is a protected area showcasing significant geological phenomena and processes.  It is also a unique manifestation of geothermal forces, natural beauty, and wild ecosystems where rare and endangered species thrive. As the site of one of the few remaining intact large ecosystems in the northern temperate zone of earth, Yellowstone’s ecological communities provide unparalleled opportunities for conservation, study, and enjoyment of large-scale wildland ecosystem processes.

Criterion (vii): The extraordinary scenic treasures of Yellowstone include the world’s largest collection of geysers, the Grand Canyon of the Yellowstone River, numerous waterfalls, and great herds of wildlife.

Criterion (viii): Yellowstone is one of the world's foremost sites for the study and appreciation of the evolutionary history of the earth. The park has a globally unparalleled assemblage of surficial geothermal activity, thousands of hot springs, mudpots and fumaroles, and more than half of the world’s active geysers. Nearly 150 species of fossil plants, ranging from small ferns and rushes up to large Sequoia and many other tree species, have been identified in the park’s abundant fossil deposits. The world’s largest recognized caldera (45 km by 75 km – 27 miles by 45 miles) is contained within the park.

Criterion (ix): The park is one of the few remaining intact large ecosystems in the northern temperate zone of the earth. All flora in the park are allowed to progress through natural succession with no direct management being practiced. Forest fires, if started from lightning, are often allowed to burn where possible to permit the natural effects of fire to periodically assert itself. The park’s bison are the only wild, continuously free-ranging bison remaining of herds that once covered the Great Plains and, along with other park wildlife, are one of the greatest attractions.

Criterion (x): Yellowstone National Park has become one of North America's foremost refuges for rare plant and animal species and also functions as a model for ecosystem processes. The grizzly bear is one of the worlds’ most intensively studied and best-understood bear populations. This research has led to a greater understanding of the interdependence of ecosystem relationships. Protection of the park’s flora and fauna, as well as the natural processes that affect their population and distribution, allow biological evolution to proceed with minimal influence by man.

Integrity

At nearly 900,000 hectares, Yellowstone National Park is a large property, and is at the heart of the vast “Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem,” (GYE) encompassing over 7 million  hectares. The park, along with the GYE, is one of the last remaining intact large ecosystems in the northern temperate zone. All wildlife species found in the region pre-European contact can still be found in the park. The property itself is of sufficient size to ensure the protection of the scenic, geologic, and geomorphological values for which it was inscribed. 

Only about 2% of Yellowstone National Park is developed (visitor and park infrastructure, roads, etc.), while over 90% of the park is managed for wilderness values with relatively light use by park visitors. 

The overall ecological integrity of the property was significantly enhanced with the restoration of the gray wolf in 1994-95, with positive impacts on a wide range of species and functions, ranging from aspen to trout.

Concerns remain over threats to integrity from invasive species, particularly lake trout, and possible impacts of climate change. Park management plans for the property have identified a number of resource protection measures, such as environmental assessment processes, zoning, ecological integrity and visitor monitoring, and education programs to address pressures arising from issues both inside and outside the property. 

Protection and management requirements

Designated by the U.S. Congress in 1872 as the world’s first national park, Yellowstone is managed under the authority of the Organic Act of August 25, 1916 which established the United States National Park Service. In addition, the park has specific enabling legislation which provides broad congressional direction regarding the primary purposes of the park. Day to day management is directed by the Park Superintendent. 

Management goals and objectives for the property have been developed through a General Management Plan, which has been supplemented in recent years with more site-specific planning exercises as well as numerous plans for specific issues and resources. In addition, the National Park Service has established Management Policies which provide broader direction for all National Park Service units, including Yellowstone. 

Protection of some of the park’s Outstanding Universal Value requires cooperation with adjacent land managers and private property owners. This is particularly true with wide-ranging wildlife species such as grizzly bears, gray wolves, and especially bison. There are concerns about increasing development around and within the GYE that may impact wildlife movement. In addition, neighboring states have specific concerns regarding bison movement outside park boundaries, though there has been success in expanding bison corridors outside the park on the northern and western boundaries. Managing visitation during all seasons to ensure good public access to the park but without detracting from the park’s unique natural values is also an ongoing challenge. Impacts from visitation range from the footprint of visitor-related infrastructure to air pollution; monitoring these impacts is essential.

The national park works closely with other land management agencies in the GYE through the Greater Yellowstone Coordinating Committee (GYCC). The park was also named a Biosphere Reserve in 1976.

Long-term protection and effective management of the site from potential threats requires continued monitoring of resource conditions, such as through the NPS Inventory and Monitoring (I&M) program. The Greater Yellowstone I&M network, of which Yellowstone National Park is a part, has developed  several “vital signs” to track a subset of physical, chemical and biological elements and processes selected to represent the overall health or condition of park resources. In Yellowstone National Park, these vital signs include land use, climate, amphibians, water resources, whitebark pine, and others.
Links
Resources and Issues 2022

State of the Park Report for 2023

Twitter - Yellowstone National Park

Instagram - Yellowstone National Park

Facebook - Yellowstone National Park

Flickr - Yellowstone National Park

World Heritage in the United States

Yellowstone National Park (U.S. National Park Service)

Protectedplanet.net

News  3
Nearly Three-Quarters of World Heritage Sites Are at High Risk from Water-Related Hazards
1 July 2025
"Passport" booklet highlighting United States’ World Heritage sites published
16 November 2012
Letter from the Chairperson of the World Heritage Committee concerning Yellowstone
16 June 2003
Media
play_arrow Yellowstone National Park (UNESCO/NHK)
United States of America
Date of Inscription: 1978
Criteria: (vii)(viii)(ix)(x)
Property : 898,349 ha

Dossier: 28
Northwest corner of the State of Wyoming and relatively small adjacent areas of the States of Montana and Idaho
N44 27 38.016 W110 49 40.008
List of World Heritage in Danger

Inscription Year on the List of World Heritage in Danger

1995 -2003
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2012 2010 2008 2006 2005 2004 2003 2002 2001 2000 1999 1998 1997 1996 1995 1994 1989 1988
Protections
by other conservation instruments

1 protection / 1 element

Biosphere Reserves (1 element)

Yellowstone - Grand Teton

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026