World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Um er-Rasas (Kastrom Mefa'a)
Um er-Rasas (Kastrom Mefa'a)
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Assistance
Um er-Rasas (Kastrom Mefa'a)

Most of this archaeological site, which started as a Roman military camp and grew to become a town from the 5th century, has not been excavated. It contains remains from the Roman, Byzantine and Early Muslim periods (end of 3rd to 9th centuries AD) and a fortified Roman military camp. The site also has 16 churches, some with well-preserved mosaic floors. Particularly noteworthy is the mosaic floor of the Church of Saint Stephen with its representation of towns in the region. Two square towers are probably the only remains of the practice, well known in this part of the world, of the stylites (ascetic monks who spent time in isolation atop a column or tower). Um er-Rasas is surrounded by, and dotted with, remains of ancient agricultural cultivation in an arid area.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Located south-east of Madaba on the edge of the semi-arid steppe, this archaeological site, which started as a Roman military camp and grew to become a town from the 5th century, is largely unexcavated. It comprises remains from the Roman, Byzantine and Early Muslim periods (end of 3rd to 9th centuries AD) including a fortified Roman military camp and sixteen churches, some with well-preserved mosaic floors. Particularly noteworthy is the mosaic floor of the Church of St Stephen with its representation of towns in the region. A tall square tower and associated buildings are probably the only remains of the practice, well known in this part of the world, of the stylites (ascetic monks who spent time in isolation atop a column or tower). Um er-Rasas is surrounded by, and dotted, with remains of ancient agricultural cultivation, including terracing, water channels and cisterns.

The Outstanding Universal Value of the site resides in the extensive settlement of the Byzantine/Umayyad period. These remains occupy the interior of the former Roman fort and also extend outside its walls to the north. They include the churches whose mosaic floors are of great artistic value. Further to the north, in a separate group of ruins associated with quarries and cisterns, is the uniquely complete tower accommodation of the stylite monks.

The picture maps in the mosaic floor of St Stephen's Church of several Palestinian and Egyptian towns in the former Byzantine Empire are identified by their place names in Greek script. These are of particular significance both artistically and as a geographical record. Other mosaic church floors including at the Church of the Lions, the  Church of Bishop Sergius, the Church of the Rivers, the Church of the Palm Tree, the Church of Bishop Paul and the Church of the Priest Wa'il depict birds and animals, fishermen and hunters incorporated into extensive geometric mosaic carpets.

The lifestyle of the stylite monks is conveyed by a 14 meter high stone tower built in the centre of a courtyard adjoined by a small church (the Church of the Tower). A room at the top of the tower, accessible from a door on the south apparently reached by a removable ladder was the monk's living quarters.

The archaeology and inscriptions show evidence that monastic Christianity was tolerated and continued during the Islamic period of the 7th and 8th centuries and testify to the spread of monotheistic beliefs in the region.

Criterion (i): Um er-Rasas is a masterpiece of human creative genius given the artistic and technical qualities of the mosaic floor of St Stephen's church.

Criterion (iv): Um er-Rasas presents a unique and complete (therefore outstanding) example of stylite towers.

Criterion (vi): Um er-Rasas is strongly associated with monasticism and with the spread of monotheism in the whole region, including Islam.

Integrity (2010)

The identified remains of the Byzantine/Umayyad settlement are included within two separate core areas encompassed and linked by the buffer zone. The integrity of these is retained. The standing remains and excavated buildings remain intact as part of an archaeological site containing many ruined structures. Parts of the site are dangerous due to structural collapse in past earthquakes and open trenches. The ruins have been subject in the past to unauthorised investigation and excavation.

The limestone structures, some bearing remnants of painted plaster, and the excavated mosaic floors are vulnerable to general weathering processes and poor drainage. Remedies for this have involved consolidation/reconstruction of standing structures, backfilling of some excavations and the construction of protective shelters over St Stephen's Church and part of the Church of the Lions.

The property is vulnerable to increased and unregulated tourism. Its setting has potential vulnerability from possible future development of the surrounding area, which is at present pastoral and sparsely settled.

Authenticity (2010)

The form, design and materials, location and setting of the ruined and excavated structures continue to express the Outstanding Universal Value of the property. Their authenticity has, to a degree, been impaired by the use of incorrect repair and maintenance techniques in consolidation work and in the protection of mosaic floors.

The setting is vulnerable to tourism and local community requirements. Access routes within the site, parking areas, visitors' facilities and pathways all require careful design and management, as do any further excavation and stabilization projects that require shelters.

Protection and management requirements (2010)

The property is protected by the Antiquities Law administered by the Department of Antiquities (DOA) under the Ministry of Tourism and Antiquities. The site manager and his assistants, an architect and archaeologist from the DOA are permanently present at the site. Five security guards from the local community deal with security issues and the safety of workers and visitors.

A Management Plan (including a comprehensive conservation plan) has been developed by a working group involving representatives from both the DOA and the Ministry. Expert committees involving staff from the DOA, other government agencies and the universities have studied particular issues and contributed to the process, which has been reviewed following recommendations by joint World Heritage Centre/ICOMOS missions in 2005 and 2006. It will incorporate guidelines and practice standards for maintenance and repair, conservation and archaeological research, together with a monitoring and maintenance programme. Once adopted, it will be implemented by the site manager and trained staff at the site.

Funding has been provided by the European Commission for a site conservation and presentation strategy for Um er-Rasas as part of a wider programme 'Protection and Promotion of Cultural Heritage in the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan', aimed at raising the quality of research, restoration and site management, visitor facilities and information. The works will be completed in accordance with revisions agreed with the World Heritage Centre including the visitors' centre, security fencing around the whole site, visitors' pathways and a new shelter over St Stephen's Church.

More land has been acquired by the DOA around the southern part of the property containing St.Stephen's and other churches and also between that and the northern part containing the stylite tower and associated structures, enabling greater protection of the site. The DOA has negotiated with the municipality of Um er- Rasas to apply specific regulations to lands adjacent to the DOA-owned land so as to anticipate and mitigate any negative impacts of future land use change. A revision to the boundaries of the World Heritage Property could be considered in the light of the greater extent of land now owned by the DOA.

The partnership established between the DOA and the local community will continue to involve the community in the protection of the property and enable them to benefit from tourism.

News  1
Videos: Site managers report on Covid-19
26 October 2020
Jordan
Date of Inscription: 2004
Criteria: (i)(iv)(vi)
Property : 23.928 ha

Buffer zone: 90 ha
Dossier: 1093
Serial: yes

Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2025 2023 2021 2019 2018 2017 2015 2013 2011 2009 2008 2007 2006 2005
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026