World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Central Amazon Conservation Complex
Central Amazon Conservation Complex
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Assistance
Central Amazon Conservation Complex

The Central Amazon Conservation Complex makes up the largest protected area in the Amazon Basin and is one of the planet’s richest regions in terms of biodiversity. It also includes an important sample of varzea ecosystems, igapó forests, lakes and channels which take the form of a constantly evolving aquatic mosaic that is home to the largest array of electric fish in the world. The site protects key threatened species, including giant arapaima fish, the Amazonian manatee, the black caiman and two species of river dolphin.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief description

This site of more than 6 million hectares is the largest protected area in the Amazon Basin and one of the richest areas of the planet in terms of biodiversity. First, Jaú National Park was inscribed in 2000. The property was subsequently expanded in 2003 with the addition of three other protected areas (Anavilhanas National Park, Amanã Sustainable Development Reserve, and Mamairauá Sustainable Development Reserve). The classification of these four sites developed into the current property entitled Central Amazon Conservation Complex.

Located primarily at the confluence of the Negro and Solimões Rivers, the property contains the majority of the ecosystems recorded in the Amazon, including dryland forests and periodically flooded lowland forests (várzea and igapó, as well as black-water or white-water watercourses, waterfalls, swamps, lakes and beaches. The Anavilhanas Archipelago, one of the largest river archipelagos in the world, is constantly evolving and is home to the largest array of electric fish on the planet. The site protects a wide variety of flora and fauna, including rare and endangered species such as the giant Arapaima (the largest freshwater fish in South America), the giant otter, Amazonian manatee, the black caiman and two species of freshwater dolphins.

Criterion (ix): The várzea and igapó flooded forests, lakes, rivers and islands of the site demonstrate ongoing ecological processes in the development of terrestrial and freshwater ecosystems. They include a constantly changing and evolving mosaic of river channels, lakes, and landforms. In constant movement, the floating mats of vegetation typical of the várzea watercourses include a significant number of endemic species and the largest array of electric fishes in the world. Anavilhanas contains the second largest river archipelago in the world, much better preserved than the larger Mariuá Archipelago, located in the same river upstream of Anavilhanas. It illustrates the process of colonization and evolution of the vegetation on changing landforms.

Criterion (x): The property protects a large and representative sample of the flora and fauna of the forests of the Amazon Central Plain, with a significant number of terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems associated with the forest which are periodically inundated by seasonal flooding, as well as swamps. Known as one of the largest Endemic Bird Areas and also as a Centre of Plant Diversity, the property protects an impressive variety of flora and fauna species of which around 60% of the fish species living in the Negro River watershed, and 60% of the birds recorded in the Central Amazon region. Characterized by a high degree of endemism, much of the wildlife is nocturnal. The property represents one of the most diverse regions for primates, with endangered species such as the bald uakari (Cacajao calvus) and black squirrel monkey saimiri (Saimiri vanzolinii) and some endangered water species as the giant otter (Pteronura brasiliensis), the Amazonian manatee (Trichechus inunguis) and the black caiman (Melanosuchus Niger).   Other notable species are the golden-backed black uakari (Cacajao melanocephalus), yellow caiman (Caiman crocodilus), jaguar (Panthera onca) and harpy eagle (Harpy harpyja), the last two being "near threatened" according to the IUCN Red List. The “pirarucu” (Arapaima gigas), the largest freshwater fish in South America, and two species of river dolphins (Inia geoffrensis and Sotalia fluviatilis), all three with a "data deficient" status, are also found in the property. In addition, 64 species of electric fish, which is the strongest known diversity for this group unique in the world, with a circulation range and an adaptation rate comparable to those of cichlids in the African Rift Valley, have been identified in the property

Integrity

The dimensions of the property are sufficient to maintain important ecological and biological processes, such as chablis, fluctuations in the dynamics of flooding and wildfires, which offers unique opportunities to study their effects on biodiversity in natural ecosystems. The dryland forests which constitute a large part of Jau and Amanã are virtually pristine wilderness areas covering millions of hectares.

The site has an excellent degree of conservation in terms of biodiversity resulting from the territorial scope of the property and the protective effect generated by the ecological corridor formed by protected areas. The boundaries of the property are mostly naturally defined by the rivers of the region and enclose large areas where anthropogenic impact levels are low. However, some of them, with a few thousand people whose survival depends on the exploitation of natural resources, do not have protection or active management It is important that all necessary measures be taken to ensure the conservation of the unique ecosystems of the region and the sustainable use of their resources, in cooperation with the stakeholders. There is no future development project that could compromise the integrity of the site.

Protection and management requirements

Protected areas that are part of the Central Amazon Conservation Complex were created at distinct periods: the Jaú National Park in 1980, the Anavilhanas Ecological Station in 1981 (relisted as a National Park in 2008), the Mamirauá Sustainable Development Reserve in 1990 and the Amanã Sustainable Development Reserve of in 1998. The National Parks are managed by the Chico Mendes Institute for Biodiversity Conservation (ICMBio), an autonomous federal agency under the Ministry of Environment. The Sustainable Development Reserves are linked to the State, and managed by the Amazonas State Conservation Units Centre (CEUC). With the exception of the Amanã Reserve, the other three protected areas have a management plan. The availability of technical, human and financial resources is essential to consolidate the management of the property.

In order to ensure a participatory management as stipulated in the Brazilian legislation, National Parks have advisory boards for their operation, and the Sustainable Development Reserves have legislative councils. It is important to continue to involve indigenous people in the management of the property, while recognizing that this is a long-term activity. The needs related to international tourism and those of research require Jaú and Mamirauá to have well-defined public use plans.

To ensure the conservation of the protected areas, protection plans are implemented by the various responsible agencies. Scientific research and environmental education activities are encouraged and developed in the Complex. All protected areas of the property are also part of the Biosphere Reserve, which comprises, with other areas, the "Mosaic of Protected Areas of the Lower Rio Negro." The whole is integrated into an extensive regional ecological corridor programme, within environmental programmes and policies designed to guarantee integration of the management and conservation of this vast portion of the Amazon biome.

Notes

Extension of "Jaú National Park".

Links
 View photos from OUR PLACE the World Heritage collection

Protectedplanet.net

News  2
World Migratory Bird Day
8 May 2021
International Day of Forests 2020
21 March 2020
Media
Brazil
Date of Inscription: 2000
Significant modifications to the boundaries : 2003
Criteria: (ix)(x)
Property : 5,232,018 ha

Dossier: 998bis
Serial: yes

Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
Protections
by other conservation instruments

2 protections / 4 elements

Biosphere Reserves (1 element)

Central Amazon
RAMSAR (3 elements)

Anavilhanas National Park
Mamirauá
Río Negro

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026