World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Historic Centres of Stralsund and Wismar
Historic Centres of Stralsund and Wismar
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Historic Centres of Stralsund and Wismar

The medieval towns of Wismar and Stralsund, on the Baltic coast of northern Germany, were major trading centres of the Hanseatic League in the 14th and 15th centuries. In the 17th and 18th centuries they became Swedish administrative and defensive centres for the German territories. They contributed to the development of the characteristic building types and techniques of Brick Gothic in the Baltic region, as exemplified in several important brick cathedrals, the Town Hall of Stralsund, and the series of houses for residential, commercial and crafts use, representing its evolution over several centuries.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Founded in the 13th century, the medieval towns of Wismar and Stralsund, on the Baltic coast of northern Germany, represent different but complementary trading structures as leading centers of the Wendish section of the Hanseatic League from the 13th to the 15th centuries. In the 17th and the 18th centuries the towns became major administrative and defense centers within the Swedish kingdom, contributing to the development of military art and integrating another layer of cultural influences.

The towns contributed to the development of the characteristic building types and techniques of the Brick Gothic in the Baltic region, using fired brick. On the main elevations the bricks could be moulded in different decorative forms, thus permitting some very elaborate architecture. This is exemplified in several churches, the Town Hall of Stralsund, and in the series of houses for residential, commercial, and craft use, representing an evolution over several centuries. The typology of houses, such as the Dielenhaus and the Kemläden, were developed in the 14th century and became a characteristic feature of many Hanseatic towns.

Wismar has preserved its medieval harbour basin, whereas the island location of Stralsund has remained unchanged since the 13th century. To this day the unmistakable silhouette of Stralsund is characterized by the outstanding buildings of Brick Gothic architecture.

Criterion (ii): Wismar and Stralsund, leading centers of the Wendish section of the Hanseatic League from the 13th to 15th centuries and major administrative and defense centers in the Swedish kingdom in the 17th and 18th centuries, contributed to the development and diffusion of brick construction techniques and building types, characteristic features of Hanseatic towns in the Baltic region, as well as the development of defense systems in the Swedish period.

Criterion (iv): Stralsund and Wismar have crucial importance in the development of the building techniques and urban form that became typical of the Hanseatic trading towns, well documented in the major parish churches, the town hall of Stralsund, and the commercial building types, such as the Dielenhaus.

Integrity

Owing to the cities’ position, the important views of both towns have been well maintained and the boundary of the medieval town can still be traced well in both cases. Modern construction and industrial buildings have been located in the suburban areas, outside the historic towns. It is thus possible to appreciate the silhouette of the historic townscapes without major changes. The area is however susceptible to visual disruption by new development. The damage suffered in World War II was relatively minor, and a large amount of original architectural substance from the Middle Ages and subsequent periods has survived. All features and structures to convey the components’ significance as leading centres of the Hanseatic league are preserved.

Authenticity

The towns contain a large number of authentic historic structures representing the evolution from the Hanseatic period to the Swedish era. As centers, which were continuously inhabited and always the heart of urban life, whose harbour remained intact and of importance for the economy in all epochs, both cities have continuously preserved their use and can therefore be described as authentic with regard to their function. Today’s high standards with regard to the preservation of monuments have been applied, whereby highest priority is attributed to the preservation of the authentic material.

Protection and management requirements

The old towns are protected in their entirety as areas of historical value in the context of the laws on the protection of historical buildings and monuments of the federal Land of Mecklenburg-Vorpommern, which require that all building measures are subject to approval.

Additional protection is ensured by the respective regulations on areas of historical value and the preservation, design and redevelopment statutes adopted by both towns to secure integrity and authenticity. The components of the World Heritage property are surrounded by designated buffer zones.

Wismar as well as Stralsund have management plans, which are updated regularly. Both municipalities involve local and external experts who encourage consistency and appropriate solutions in building and town-planning practice (Architectural advisory board Stralsund, World Heritage council Stralsund, Architectural advisory board Wismar).

Both cities have established local coordinators for the site management.

Links
Instagram page

Twitter account

Facebook page

Two Cities - One Heritage (in English only)

Deutsche UNESCO-Kommission

German World Heritage Foundation (in English only)

Hanseatic City of Stralsund (in English only)

Hanseatic City of Wismar

Activities 1
World Heritage Cities Programme
Germany
Date of Inscription: 2002
Criteria: (ii)(iv)
Property : 168 ha

Buffer zone: 448 ha
Dossier: 1067
Serial: yes

Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026