World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Brazilian Atlantic Islands: Fernando de ...
Brazilian Atlantic Islands: Fernando de Noronha and Atol das Rocas Reserves
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Assistance
Brazilian Atlantic Islands: Fernando de Noronha and Atol das Rocas Reserves

Peaks of the Southern Atlantic submarine ridge form the Fernando de Noronha Archipelago and Rocas Atoll off the coast of Brazil. They represent a large proportion of the island surface of the South Atlantic and their rich waters are extremely important for the breeding and feeding of tuna, shark, turtle and marine mammals. The islands are home to the largest concentration of tropical seabirds in the Western Atlantic. Baia de Golfinhos has an exceptional population of resident dolphin and at low tide the Rocas Atoll provides a spectacular seascape of lagoons and tidal pools teeming with fish.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief description

Of indescribable beauty, the Fernando de Noronha Marine National Park, located at a distance of about 340 km off the Brazilian coast, is formed by volcanic peaks of a submerged mountain chain. Nearly 70% of the main island of Fernando de Noronha, 21 smaller islands and islets of the archipelago, as well as most adjacent waters to a depth of 50 metres are part of the property.  The Atol das Rocas Biological Reserve, the only atoll in the South Atlantic, is located about 150 km west of Fernando de Noronha. It is an elliptical reef including two small islands surrounded by a marine reserve. With these two protected areas, the property covers an area of 42,270 ha and a buffer zone of 140,713 ha.
At the heart of a vast ocean surface, the Brazilian Atlantic Islands form an oasis of fertile waters, which are extremely important breeding and living places for tuna, shark, turtle and marine mammals, and which play a crucial role in the natural fish restocking of the region. Two species of sea turtle breed there: the hawksbill and green turtle, for which the Rocas Atoll is considered the second most important breeding site of Brazil. These islands are home to the largest concentration of tropical seabirds in the Western Atlantic, and include the only examples of Insular Atlantic Forest and the only oceanic mangrove in the South Atlantic. Dolphin Bay (Baía dos Golfinhos) hosts an exceptional population of resident dolphin, and at low tide, Rocas Atoll provides a spectacular seascape of lagoons and tidal pools teeming with fish and a great variety of shellfish, sponges, molluscs, corals, etc.

Criterion (vii): Dolphin Bay is the only known place in the world with such a large population of resident dolphins. In addition, two of its beaches, Praia do Sancho and Praia do Leão, were elected as the most beautiful in Brazil. The Rocas Atoll has a spectacular seascape, especially at low tide when the exposed reef surrounding shallow lagoons and tidal pools forms a natural aquarium. Both sites also have exceptional underwater landscapes that have been recognised worldwide in specialized diving literature.

Criterion (ix): The Fernando de Noronha and Atol das Rocas represents over half the insular coastal waters of the Southern Atlantic Ocean. These highly productive waters provide feeding ground for species such as tuna, billfish, cetaceans, sharks and marine turtles as they migrate to the African coast.  An oasis of marine life in relatively barren, open ocean, the islands play a key role in the process of reproduction, dispersal and colonization by marine organisms in the entire Tropical South Atlantic.

Criterion (x): The Fernando de Noronha and Rocas Atoll are key sites for the protection of biodiversity and endangered species in the Southern Atlantic. Providing a large proportion of the insular habitat of the South Atlantic, the site is essential for the maintenance of marine biodiversity. It is important for the conservation of threatened species of marine turtles, particularly the hawksbill turtle. The site accommodates the largest concentration of tropical seabirds to be found in the Western Atlantic Ocean and is a Global Centre of Bird Endemism. The site also contains the only remaining sample of the Insular Atlantic Forest and the only oceanic mangrove in the South Atlantic region.

Integrity

The terrestrial and marine components of the site are well protected. The boundaries of the site are appropriate for the conservation of the marine biological diversity, even if the property is divided into two separate components. On the main island of Fernando de Noronha all the key terrestrial habitats are part of the Park and all land areas of the Rocas Atoll are located in the central zone of the protected area.
At Fernando de Noronha, the ecosystem retains great integrity, despite the growing number of visitors to the island and the impacts generated by the presence of invasive alien species. The infrastructure and management have been improved to ensure better conservation of the values of this site.
Although the level of preservation of the ecosystems of the Rocas Atoll remains high, overfishing and the illegal presence of tourist boats are the main threats to the integrity of the site.

Protection and management requirements


The property has adequate legal protection conferred by a number of federal laws and state regulations. The Chico Mendes Institute for Biodiversity Conservation (ICMBio), an autonomous federal agency under the Ministry of Environment, is responsible for the management and conservation of the site. The site has two separate management plans, one for Fernando de Noronha and the other for Rocas Atoll. These management plans address issues such as tourism, research, environmental education, protection and monitoring of the biodiversity. For the Fernando de Noronha Marine National Park, a Sustainable Development and Ecotourism Management Plan was implemented with the support of local people. It strictly controls the development of tourism infrastructure and visits, and also covers the urbanized areas located outside the property. This plan takes into account the carrying capacity of different areas within the park and regulates navigation and diving.
Some of the main threats are related to fishing, their implications for fish populations and their composition in terms of species in the Reserve, as well as their effect on sea turtles and other species.  A new approach involving the regulation of fishing in the area surrounding the property may be required. Since Fernando de Noronha was completely deforested (while the island was used as a prison, then as a military base), vegetation is now either secondary or composed of invasive species. The introduction of rats, mice, dogs, and even tegus (a lizard) has had dramatic effects on birds. The restoration of the original vegetation and eradication of invasive species should be an urgent priority for this globally important site. Good management of the increasing tourism in this fragile environment is also very important.
Founded in 1979, the Atol das Rocas Biological Reserve is banned from public access and managed for the protection of species and for research. The underwater links between the two components would merit study.  The Reserve benefits from surveillance by the Brazilian Navy and the Air Force, notably as concerns fishing and tourism activities.
To provide financial support and strengthen local wildlife management, the ICMBio developed two projects: the Tamar Project, for marine turtles and the Spinner Dolphin Project.

Links
 View photos from OUR PLACE the World Heritage collection

unep-wcmc.org

Protectedplanet.net

Activities 3
World Heritage Marine Programme
The Mid-Atlantic Ridge
Rapid Response Facility (RRF)
News  9
Brazilian youth joins UNESCO environmental DNA sampling at Fernando de Noronha
6 December 2022
Ocean: UNESCO launches emergency plan to boost World Heritage-listed reefs’ resilience
14 April 2022
Marine World Heritage-inspired artwork to celebrate World Oceans Day
8 June 2018
Spearheading a global conservation movement: Marine World Heritage 2018 annual report
6 February 2018
More add
Brazil
Date of Inscription: 2001
Criteria: (vii)(ix)(x)
Property : 43,270 ha

Buffer zone: 140,713 ha
Dossier: 1000rev
Serial: yes

Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
Protections
by other conservation instruments

2 protections / 3 elements

Biosphere Reserves (1 element)

Mata Atlântica
RAMSAR (2 elements)

Atol das Rocas Biological Reserve
Fernando de Noronha Archipelago

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026