World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Royal Court of Tiébélé
Royal Court of Tiébélé
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Royal Court of Tiébélé

The property is an earthen architectural complex established since the 16th century that bears testimony to the social organization and cultural values of the Kasena people. Enclosed by a protective compound wall, the Royal Court consists of a set of buildings arranged in distinct concessions separated by walls and passageways leading to ceremonial and gathering places outside the compound. Built by the men of the Royal Court, the huts are then adorned with decorations of symbolic significance by the women, who are the sole guardians of this knowledge and ensure this tradition is kept alive.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Established since the 16th century at the foot of the hill of Tchébili, 172 km south of the capital Ouagadougou and approximately fifteen kilometres north of the border with Ghana, the Royal Court of Tiébélé is an earthen architectural complex that bears testimony to the social organisation and cultural values of the Kasena people.  

Its specific architecture, which combines earth, wood, cow dung and straw, is arranged according to a social and spatial distribution inside the Court based on the status of the inhabitants. A distinction is drawn between the mother houses or Dinian, the foundational structures of the domain, with a figure-of-eight floor plan, reserved for the elderly, widows, unmarried women and children; the houses of the young married people, which are quadrangular (Mangolo); and the houses of the adolescent and unmarried men, which are circular (Draa).

In addition to the houses, there are symbolic sacred elements: the pourou, the sacred tumulus where the placenta of the new-borns of the royal family are buried; the red fig tree marking the entrance to the Court, beneath which are placed the sacred stones (dala), on which sit the princes and dignitaries; the nabari, the tomb of the founder of the royal family; the nankongo, which is used as a law court and place of parley; and the bonnalè, the cemetery of the Royal Court. These elements bear eloquent testimony to the preservation of traditional practices specific to Kasena culture.

The Court is also the embodiment of practices and knowhow which help to make it an evolving and living site. The practice of mural decoration, exclusively reserved to the women of the Court, is subject to a repertory of motifs that are both ancient and constantly renewed, and passed on from generation to generation by observation and practice, and by the organisation of ceremonies and competitions. The ritual practices that are fundamental to the ancestor cult and the funeral rites are an integral part of the spiritual and temporal rituals that are specific to Kasena culture, under the authority of the Pê.

Criterion (iii): The Royal Court of Tiébélé is an outstanding example of an earthen architectural complex, which is distinctive in terms of its construction techniques, its spatial, social and functional distribution, the role of men and women in its construction, the plurality of its architectural forms, its decorative style and its specificity as a living site. It is an outstanding illustration of Kasena culture, of which the Royal Court architecture and mural decorations are representative, and of the associated social, anthropological and political aspects. These characteristics bear outstanding and living testimony to the culture and traditions of the Kasena people, which have evolved over time while preserving the identity and values of the Kasena people.

Integrity

The integrity of the Royal Court of Tiébélé is based on the set of concession huts and on the sacred symbolic elements that continue to be used today. The Royal Court has retained its original site and has been preserved from urban development up to the present day by its immediate surroundings, which are still predominantly natural. The property embodies all the attributes of Outstanding Universal Value. However, integrity continues to be threatened by a lack of maintenance, or even the ruin of certain concessions, and the use of new materials and chemicals. Furthermore, the maintenance of the concessions and their alterations lead sometimes to construction malpractices that cause problems of rising damp, erosion and water drainage. Lastly, hut construction techniques are changing, particularly with the use of the adobe technique, the making of cement brick foundations and the use of tar-based paint coatings; if these practices become widespread, they could adversely affect the integrity of the property.

Authenticity

The Royal Court of Tiébélé has successfully preserved its authenticity with regards to the conservation or evolution of traditional practices, both as concerns construction methods and the architecture that is specific to the Kasena culture and way of life, which includes the social distribution of tasks of construction and decoration. It is however important to put in place a system that ensures the preservation of ancient motifs, while enabling evolution through the creation of new motifs, thereby strengthening the living character of the property and of the practices and knowhow associated with its architecture. The development of the use of new materials, such as cement, corrugated sheet metal, metal windows and tar and other chemicals to replace the natural pigments used for the mural decorations, could adversely affect the authenticity of the property.

Protection and management requirements

The Royal Court of Tiébélé is under the administrative supervision of the General Directorate of Culture and Art. The Court is legally protected by the Law 024-2007/AN of 13 November 2007 for the protection of the cultural heritage of Burkina Faso and Decree n°2014-1019/PRES/PM/MCT/MEDD/MATS/MATDS of 28 October 2014 for the classification of cultural and natural properties and their inscription on the Tentative List of the heritage of Burkina Faso. Law n°014/96/ADP of 23 May 1996 for agricultural and land reorganisation in Burkina Faso (RAF) allows the community to dispose of its domain, that is the whole of the Court and a large proportion of the buffer zone, which is a property owned by the Pê. The intangible dimension of the Court is taken into account by the Order n°2015-0338/MCT/SG of 23 December 2015 for the proclamation of the Living Human Treasures of Burkina Faso. The management of the Royal Court of Tiébélé is traditionally the task of the Pê (the customary Chief) and of the community.

A conservation and management plan for 2022-2026 was validated in 2021. Two bodies have been set up to implement the plan: a local committee responsible for implementing the plan through conservation actions for the property, and a scientific committee whose task is to carry out specific studies of the property.

The protection and management plan will be strengthened by the incorporation in the management and conservation plan of the existence and potential impacts of land use and development projects that are ongoing or that may arise in the future, the recourse to Heritage Impact Assessments, risk management and monitoring of the implementation of the conservation plan, while defining the roles, responsibilities and modes of operation of the local committee and the scientific committee.

Activities 1
Culture|2030 Indicators National Profile of Burkina Faso
News  2
A major step forward in the protection of African World Heritage
7 August 2024
UNESCO World Heritage: 24 new sites inscribed
1 August 2024
Burkina Faso
Date of Inscription: 2024
Criteria: (iii)
Property : 1.84 ha

Buffer zone: 14.12 ha
Dossier: 1713
N11 5 21.2 E0 57 42.7
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

Protections
by other conservation instruments

1 protection / 1 element

Second Protocol to the 1954 Hague Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict (1 element)

Royal Court of Tiébélé

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026