World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Messel Pit Fossil Site
Messel Pit Fossil Site
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Messel Pit Fossil Site

Messel Pit is the richest site in the world for understanding the living environment of the Eocene, between 57 million and 36 million years ago. In particular, it provides unique information about the early stages of the evolution of mammals and includes exceptionally well-preserved mammal fossils, ranging from fully articulated skeletons to the contents of stomachs of animals of this period.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Messel Pit provides the single best fossil site which contributes to the understanding of evolution and past environments during the Palaeogene, a period which saw the emergence of the first modern mammals. The property includes a detailed geological record of middle Eocene age, dating from 47-48 million years ago. It provides unique information about the early stages of the evolution of mammals and is exceptional in the quality of preservation, quantity and diversity of fossils of over 1000 species of plants and animals, ranging from fully articulated skeletons to feathers, skin, hair and stomach contents. Located in the German Land of Hesse, this area of just 42 ha conserves a rich fossiliferous bed of oil shale some 190 m thick. Discovered through mining activities, the area has now been preserved and has been the subject of important paleontological research, which has greatly contributed to our knowledge of evolutionary history. Significant scientific discoveries include studies of the evolution of echolocation in exceptionally well-preserved fossil bats and vital new data on the evolution of primates, birds and insects.

Criterion (viii): Messel Pit Fossil Site is considered to be the single best site which contributes to the understanding of the Eocene, when mammals became firmly established in all principal land ecosystems. The state of preservation of its fossils is exceptional and allows for high-quality scientific work.

Integrity

As the Messel Pit is the former site of an oil shale mine, the land surface has been significantly disturbed. Paradoxically, if there had been no mine, the scientific values of the property would have never been discovered. Once mining was discontinued in the late 1960’s, the site was opened to private prospection and even proposed as a refuse dump in 1971, a threat that led to increased scientific prospection and public concern. This culminated in the purchase of the pit by the government and its full protection as a cultural monument. The extraordinary state of conservation of the property’s fossils, which allows for the reconstruction of the morphology of the preserved fauna and flora as well as that of their environment, and the serious commitment by government for its long-term maintenance as a site of scientific importance, means that the conditions of integrity for the property are fully met. Although much material has been taken from the site - approximately 20 million tonnes of rock in a century of mining activities - the volume of fossil-bearing oil shale sediments is still massive and far from depleted.

Protection and management requirements

The Land of Hesse is the legal owner of the Messel Fossil Pit. The oil shale in the pit is a historical mineral resource, making it part of the cultural heritage as defined in the Hessian Heritage Protection Act. Operations in the mine are governed by the Federal Mining Act. The property is jointly managed through an agreement between the government, the Senckenberg Society for Nature Research and the Messel Pit World Heritage Non-Profit Limited, an NGO founded in 2003, which has as its principal responsibility the presentation of the site to visitors. Shareholders of this NGO are the Land of Hesse, the Senckenberg Society for Nature Research and the municipality of Messel. The Messel Pit Fossil Site is administrated separately from the Federal State budget.

Under German law, the Senckenberg Society for Nature Research is the operator of the mine, which has an agreement with the Land of Hesse for the protection and preservation of the Messel Pit. The operator is responsible for the main operating plan of the mine, which includes water drainage, slope reinforcement, management of encroaching vegetation, protection against trespassers and management of the former North-East Dump, as well as for sustaining scientific research. The property is surrounded by a perimeter fence and controls on excavation and disturbance to the oil shale are in place. Various development and landscape plans for the property have been produced, as well as an overall Management Plan. A 22.5 ha buffer zone surrounding the property was defined in order to strengthen the integrity of the property and support its effective protection and management. A viewing platform overlooking the pit, a visitor information centre and a wide range of communication activities concerning the property are in place. 

Links
Google Arts & Culture: Story

grube-messel.de

 View photos from OUR PLACE the World Heritage collection

UNESCO Commission of Germany

Fossilienlagerstätte Grube Messel (Deutsche UNESCO-Kommission)

Protectedplanet.net

News  3
International Day for Monuments and Sites 2021 - Complex Pasts: Diverse Futures
16 April 2021
Videos: Site managers report on Covid-19
26 October 2020
Wadden Sea World Heritage showcases sustainable tourism at the ITB 2017
12 March 2017
Events  1
UNESCO at the world’s largest tourism fair - ITB Berlin 2017
8 Mar 2017 - 12 Mar 2017
Media
play_arrow Messel Pit Fossil Site (UNESCO/NHK)
Germany
Date of Inscription: 1995
Minor boundary modification inscribed year: 2010
Criteria: (viii)
Property : 42 ha

Buffer zone: 22.5 ha
Dossier: 720bis
District of Darmstadt-Dieburg, State of Hesse (Hessen)
N49 55 4.8 E8 45 25.2
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

Protections
by other conservation instruments

1 protection / 1 element

Geoparks (1 element)

Bergstraße-Odenwald UNESCO Global Geopark

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026