World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Thracian Tomb of Kazanlak
Thracian Tomb of Kazanlak
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Assistance
Thracian Tomb of Kazanlak

Discovered in 1944, this tomb dates from the Hellenistic period, around the end of the 4th century BC. It is located near Seutopolis, the capital city of the Thracian king Seutes III, and is part of a large Thracian necropolis. The tholos has a narrow corridor and a round burial chamber, both decorated with murals representing Thracian burial rituals and culture. These paintings are Bulgaria’s best-preserved artistic masterpieces from the Hellenistic period.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The Thracian tomb of Kazanlak is a unique aesthetic and artistic work, a masterpiece of the Thracian creative spirit. This monument is the only one of its kind anywhere in the world. The exceptionally well preserved frescos and the original condition of the structure reveal the remarkable evolution and high level of culture and pictorial art in Hellenistic Thrace.

Criterion (i): The Thracian Tomb of Kazanlak is the masterpiece of the Thracian creative spirit.

Criterion (iii): The Kazanlak frescoes testify to high level of culture and pictorial art in Thracia.

Criterion (iv): The Kazanlak frescoes represent a significant stage in the development of Hellenistic funerary art.

Integrity

The integrity of the site is intact. The defined boundaries and buffer zone, and the location of the Tomb in a park area, provides a secure environment for the property. The property encompasses within its boundaries all the components that convey the outstanding universal value. The Tomb is protected from the negative effects of visitors, through offering access to the nearby museum that contains a copy of the tomb architecture and its fresco decoration.

Authenticity

The Tomb meets the requirements for authenticity as the construction and walls remain in their original condition, without modification or addition, and its frescoes are very well preserved. At the time of inscription, the Tomb was secured under a permanent protective building, and its principle cultural value - the exclusive mural decoration - was fully preserved. In this process, the murals were cleaned and strengthened. Using techniques that did not violate their authenticity, they were not retouched or additionally filled. Air conditioning was installed to ensure a constant temperature.

Protection and management requirements

The management is implemented by virtue of:

- Cultural Heritage Law (Official Gazette No.19 of 2009) and subdelegated legislation. This law regulates the research, studying, protection and promotion of the immovable cultural heritage in Bulgaria, and the development of Conservation and Management plans for its inscribed World Heritage List of immovable cultural properties;

- the Tomb's preservation and visiting regime prescribed by the National Institute for preservation of the immovable cultural properties. 

Bulgaria
Date of Inscription: 1979
Criteria: (i)(iii)(iv)
Property : 0.0155 ha

Buffer zone: 7.09 ha
Dossier: 44
Kazanlak, Province of Stara Zagora
N42 37 32.7864 E25 23 57.0192
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026