World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Luis Barragán House and Studio
Luis Barragán House and Studio
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Luis Barragán House and Studio

Built in 1948, the House and Studio of architect Luis Barragán in the suburbs of Mexico City represents an outstanding example of the architect’s creative work in the post-Second World War period. The concrete building, totalling 1,161 m2, consists of a ground floor and two upper storeys, as well as a small private garden. Barragán’s work integrated modern and traditional artistic and vernacular currents and elements into a new synthesis, which has been greatly influential, especially in the contemporary design of gardens, plazas and landscapes.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief Synthesis

Built in 1947-1948, the Luis Barragán House and Studio located in a working class suburb of Mexico City represents an outstanding example of the architect’s creative work in the post-Second World War period. Barragán created a regional adaptation of the International Modern Movement in architectural design. The concrete building, totalling 1,161 square metres, consists of a ground floor and two upper storeys, as well as a small private garden. The architect’s integration of modern design with traditional Mexican vernacular elements has been greatly influential, especially in the contemporary design of gardens. For example, his use of water and fountains reflects Mediterranean and Islamic traditions, in particular Moroccan.

The house and studio of Luis Barragán owes its singularity to being a personal and therefore unique reflection of its designer. This autobiographical background did not prevent this artist manifesto from going well beyond its time and its cultural milieu and becoming a distinguished reference in 20th century fine art and architecture. Of particular note is the profound dialogue between light and constructed space and the way in which colour is substantial to form and materials. It is a house which appeals to all the senses and re-evaluates the ways in which architecture can be perceived and enjoyed by its inhabitants. Many of its materials were found in traditional architecture and, distant as they are from industrial production, they reveal the aging of the house with a patina which the architect acknowledged as the poetic value of his architecture.

Criterion (i): The House and Studio of Luis Barragán represent a masterpiece of the new developments in the Modern Movement, integrating traditional, philosophical and artistic currents into a new synthesis.

Criterion (ii): The work of Luis Barragán exhibits the integration of modern and traditional influences, which in turn have had an important impact especially on the design of gardens and urban landscapes.

Integrity 

The house and studio that comprise the inscribed property occupy two adjacent lots, numbers 12 and 14 of General Francisco Ramirez Street. The architect lived and worked here until his death in 1988 and he determined and supervised any modifications. Luis Barragán believed that ‘a house is never finished; it is an organism in constant evolution’. The value of the property’s integrity resides in the fact that these modifications represent an autobiographic document of the artist and the evolution of his ideas. Moreover it is conserved in its entirety including kitchen installations and the owner’s Cadillac.

The property itself was considered to be in a reasonable state of conservation at the time of inscription (2004). Specific threats relate to insufficient planning controls, increased traffic in the surrounding neighbourhood, and uncontrolled development specifically linked to high-rise construction within the buffer zone. Such development will have a negative impact on the character of the house which is introverted and intimate. It will also affect its visual integrity, in particular views from the garden and terraces. Additional risks to the property include earthquakes and fire. Regular inspections and preventative measures are required.

Authenticity

The House and Studio of Luis Barragán are conserved with great respect, including not only the structure, materials, furniture, objects, art collections, garden and library, but also the kitchen installations. Conservation is extended to the various changes that have occurred over time. In this sense, the property certainly meets the test of authenticity. Occupied by the architect until his death, the house and studio are currently a museum and are open to the public.

Protection and management requirements

In November 1988, the Mexican Government declared the House and Studio of Luis Barragán an Artistic Monument requiring all conservation and restoration work carried out must be authorized by the Instituto Nacional de Bellas Artes y Literatura (National Institute of Fine Arts and Literature). The protection of the house was completed prior to inscription and the additional protection of the studio is in process according to the State Party. This declaration extends to any excavations, foundations, conservation work or demolitions carried out by owners of properties adjacent to the monument.

The museum is managed by the Luis Barragán Foundation of Guadalajara Architecture, a non-governmental body that, along with the museum administration and INBA, is responsible for preserving the integrity and authenticity of the property. Since 1994, restoration has been the responsibility of Andrés Casillas de Alba, a disciple and close collaborator of Luis Barragán. Annual work plans provide sufficient care for the property and a 22.9-hectare buffer zone surrounds the property on three sides.

Links
Luis Barragán House and Studio's Instagram

Luis Barragán House and Studio's website page

 View photos from OUR PLACE the World Heritage collection

Activities 1
Culture|2030 Indicators National Profile of the Mexico
Events  1
Mexico's World Heritage Sites Photographic Exhibition at UN Headquarters
24 Feb 2006 - 28 Feb 2006
Mexico
Date of Inscription: 2004
Criteria: (i)(ii)
Property : 0.1161 ha

Buffer zone: 22.943 ha
Dossier: 1136
Mexico City
N19 24 40.312 W99 11 32.472
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026