World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Old Town of Galle and its Fortifications
Old Town of Galle and its Fortifications
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Assistance
Old Town of Galle and its Fortifications

Founded in the 16th century by the Portuguese, Galle reached the height of its development in the 18th century, before the arrival of the British. It is the best example of a fortified city built by Europeans in South and South-East Asia, showing the interaction between European architectural styles and South Asian traditions.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Old Town of Galle and its Fortifications is situated on a small rocky promontory on the southwest coast of Sri Lanka. Founded in the 16th century by the Portuguese as a fortified town, Galle reached the height of its development in the 18th century under Dutch colonial rule. It is the best representation of a fortified city built by the Europeans in South Asia, showing the interaction between European planning principles and South Asian architectural traditions. Its street grid represents the typical Dutch tradition of parcelling out blocks with the purpose of creating clusters of buildings within a limited area. Rows of houses with their narrow sides facing the streets and verandas shaded by high overhanging roofs supported on slender columns create distinctive streetscapes. These characteristics, along with internal courtyards, are among the adopted South Asian elements that create the settlement’s unique character. The Old Town also consists of public and administrative buildings that reflect colonial architectural characteristics, but are composed in a manner that is sensitive to the rest of the architectural fabric. The monumental ramparts that fortify the town do not conform precisely to typical European geometric plans. Instead, they follow the existing morphology of the site, where rock outcrops are located within the promontory of Galle. Bastions located at strategic points both seaward and landward together with the ramparts reflect the fortification engineering knowledge developed by the Dutch in the unfamiliar South Asian terrain.

Criterion (iv): Galle provides an outstanding example of an urban ensemble which illustrates the interaction of European architecture and South Asian traditions from the 16th to the 19th centuries during the period of European expansion in Asia. The most salient feature is the use of European models adapted by local craftspeople to the geological, climatic, historical, and cultural conditions of Sri Lanka. In the structure of the ramparts, coral is frequently used along with granite. In the ground layout, all the measures of length, width, and height conform to the regional metrology. The narrow streets are lined with houses, each with its own garden and an open veranda supported by columns, another sign of the acculturation of an architecture which is European only in its basic design. Among the characteristics that make this an urban ensemble of exceptional value is the original underground drainage system still in use from the 17th century, which is flushed by tidal sea water.

Integrity

Within the boundaries of Old Town of Galle and its Fortifications are elements and components related to town planning, fortification engineering, and architecture that are necessary to express the Outstanding Universal Value of the property. The fortifications on all sides, which define the property, ensure the complete representation of all features and convey the totality of the value. The physical fabric of these elements is in good condition and has been preserved to express the value.

Authenticity

The form and design of the original town plan, with its street grid, facades, and the scales of the streetscapes, truly reflect the value of the old town. The architectural form and design as well as the construction materials and techniques of the public and administrative buildings are well preserved. The military design and the construction technique and materials of the ramparts and bastions are also well preserved. The location and setting of the town and its fortifications in relation to its seascape and landscape are also well preserved. Although the original military function has ceased at present, the property still retains its original residential and public/ administrative uses. The property has therefore retained its authenticity.

Protection and management requirements

The fortifications and some of the public buildings are under the legal ownership of the Department of Archaeology of the Government of Sri Lanka, which administers the Antiquities Ordinance of 1948 (rev. 1998) at the national level. Some selected houses and other buildings are declared as protected monuments under the provision of the Antiquities Ordinance, while most houses remain as private properties. As per the Antiquities Ordinance, no interventions are allowed within 400 yards (366 metres) of a declared monument, and the whole extent of the fort is covered by this regulation. The Department of Archaeology therefore has control over the whole property. In addition, provisions of the Urban Development Authority Law are being applied for better planning control of the property. The Galle Heritage Foundation was created in 1994 under an Act of Parliament with a view to bring all the stakeholders and partners under one umbrella for effective conservation and management of the property.

The long-term challenge is to sustain the Outstanding Universal Value of the property as a living city, providing for modern living standards and managing the demand for new uses without compromising the various aspects of its authenticity mentioned above; this is being handled carefully by the Galle Heritage Foundation whose Board of Management is comprised of all the stakeholders including the Department of Archaeology, Urban Development Authority, etc. 

Activities 2
World Heritage Earthen Architecture Programme (WHEAP)
World Heritage Cities Programme
News  1
UNESCO offers tsunami assistance to countries in South Asia
30 December 2004
Media
play_arrow Old Town of Galle and its Fortifications (UNESCO/NHK)
Sri Lanka
Date of Inscription: 1988
Criteria: (iv)
Dossier: 451
City of Galle, Southern Province
N6 1 40.984 E80 12 58.846
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2024 2023 2021 2018 2016 2014 2013 2012 2011 2010 2009 2008 2005 2001 1999 1997
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026