World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Kinabalu Park
Kinabalu Park
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Kinabalu Park

Kinabalu Park, in the State of Sabah on the northern end of the island of Borneo, is dominated by Mount Kinabalu (4,095 m), the highest mountain between the Himalayas and New Guinea. It has a very wide range of habitats, from rich tropical lowland and hill rainforest to tropical mountain forest, sub-alpine forest and scrub on the higher elevations. It has been designated as a Centre of Plant Diversity for Southeast Asia and is exceptionally rich in species with examples of flora from the Himalayas, China, Australia, Malaysia, as well as pan-tropical flora.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Located in the State of Sabah, Malaysia, on the northern end of the island of Borneo, Kinabalu Park World Heritage property covers 75,370 ha. Dominated by Mount Kinabalu (4,095m), the highest mountain between the Himalayas and New Guinea, it holds a distinctive position for the biota of Southeast Asia.  Geologically, Kinabalu Park is a granite intrusion formed 15 million years ago and thrust upward one million years ago by tectonic movements and shaped by forces that continue to define its landscape. Despite its geological youth it is exceptionally high in species with living relics of natural vegetation remaining, over 93% of the Park area.

The altitudinal range of the property, 152m – 4,095m, presents a wide array of habitats from rich tropical lowland and hill rainforest (35% of the park) to tropical montane forest (37%), and sub-alpine forest and scrub at the highest elevations. Ultramafic (serpentine) rocks cover about 16% of the park and have vegetation specific to this substrate. The property has been identified as a Centre of Plant Diversity for Southeast Asia; it contains representatives from at least half of all Borneo’s plant species and is exceptionally rich in species with elements from the Himalayas, China, Australia, Malaysia, and pan tropical floras. With records of half of all Borneo’s birds, mammals and amphibian species and two-thirds of all Bornean reptiles the property is both species-rich and an important centre for endemism.

Criterion (ix): Kinabalu Park has an exceptional array of naturally functioning ecosystems. A number of processes actively provide ideal conditions for the diverse biota, high endemism and rapid evolutionary rates. Several factors combine to influence these processes; (1) the great altitudinal and climatic gradient from tropical forest to alpine conditions; (2) steeply dissected topography causing effective geographical isolation over short distances; (3) the diverse geology with many localised edaphic conditions, particularly the ultramafic substrates; (4) the frequent climate oscillations influenced by El Niño events; and (5) geological history of the Malay archipelago and proximity to the much older Crocker Range.

Criterion (x): Floristically species-rich and identified as a globally important Centre of Plant Endemism, Kinabalu Park contains an estimated 5,000-6,000 vascular plant species including representatives from more than half the families of all flowering plants. The presence of 1,000 orchid species, 78 species of Ficus, and 60 species of ferns is indicative of the botanical richness of the property. The variety of Kinabalu’s habitats includes six vegetation zones, ranging from lowland rainforest to alpine scrub at 4,095m. Faunal diversity is also high and the property is an important centre for endemism. The majority of Borneo’s mammals, birds, amphibians and invertebrates (many threatened and vulnerable) are known to occur in the park including; 90 species of lowland mammal, 22 mammal species in the montane zone and 326 bird species.

Integrity

The boundaries of Kinabalu Park encompass the main bulk of Mount Kinabalu, including all remaining naturally forested slopes. The property thus incorporates the natural diversity and habitats that constitute Kinabalu’s outstanding natural heritage values. The boundaries are clearly delineated, surveyed and demarcated on the ground and regular patrols are conducted to monitor pressures and avoid any impacts on the values of the property. Implementation of strong protection and enforcement measures ensures that the integrity of the property and its natural values are maintained.

Settlement, agricultural development, and logging occur right up to the boundary in many places. Pressure for modification to the boundaries has resulted in losses of integrity in some areas and continued regulation of development in key strategic locations outside the park is required to prevent further impacts. Current levels of patrolling and clearly defined and marked boundaries continue to ensure that threats from encroachment remain minimal.

Protection and management requirements

Legislation and institutional structures of Kinabalu Park are established under the Parks Enactment 1984 and Amendment of 2007, which specify functions, procedures, protection and control of the property. The Board of Trustees of the Sabah Parks, under the jurisdiction of the State Ministry of Tourism Development, Environment, Science and Technology has ownership of the property and is responsible for its management. Both the state and federal government have powers to pass legislation, provided consultation is undertaken. However, Malaysia’s national park act does not apply to Sabah and as such the state level of government has the prime responsibility for management of the property and enforcement of legislation.

The management plan of the property was prepared in 1993 providing guidance to address these management issues and is backed and supported by adequate legislation and policies of the State. Updating of the management plan is required to ensure current effective management practices and policies continue to ensure future protection.

The property sets a high standard of protected area management in Southeast Asia and staffing and budget levels are adequate for current needs. Although much of the lowland forest of the region has been transformed to other uses and the park is becoming an “island in a sea” of agriculture and other developments, it remains in an excellent state of conservation. The State Government closed mining activity bordering the Park, and logging encroachment has been successfully controlled. The improved park enforcement and prosecution capability is effective in controlling all significant threats.

Key management issues are growing pressure from commercial tourism, adjacent land uses, encroachment, and the need for increased capacity building, and greater public awareness. Tourism pressures are high and growing but impacts are currently under control, and intensive visitor facility development is kept to the margins of the park. Extensive planning and management will be required to ensure impacts from tourism levels within the park are limited as the number of visitors’ increases.

In the long term, the property would benefit from designation of buffer zones, assignment of highly appropriate and competent officers and supporting staff, strengthening the community support through a participation programme, and revising, enhancing, and strengthening the existing management plan using holistic planning process and approaches. All these are currently under active consideration. The property has been subject to extensive research and has an excellent collection of specimens along with sufficient research facilities. Integration of the results obtained from research and with the management actions and decisions will assist in ensuring the long-term conservation of the property and its unique and important natural values.

Links
 View photos from OUR PLACE the World Heritage collection

Protectedplanet.net

Activities 2
Business Planning for World Heritage Site Managers - a Toolkit
Business Skills for Natural World Heritage Site Managers programme
News  4
Great Apes Infographic Highlights World Heritage Importance
24 April 2015
Business Skills training sessions begin for World Heritage sites
13 November 2009
Business Skills for World Heritage Training Programme Launched
15 May 2009
World Heritage Committee Inscribes 61 New Sites on World Heritage List
30 November 2000
Media
Malaysia
Date of Inscription: 2000
Criteria: (ix)(x)
Property : 75,370 ha

Dossier: 1012
State of Sabah
N6 8 49.2 E116 38 31.2
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

Protections
by other conservation instruments

1 protection / 1 element

Geoparks (1 element)

Kinabalu UNESCO Global Geopark

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026