World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Works of Antoni Gaudí
Works of Antoni Gaudí
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Works of Antoni Gaudí

Seven properties built by the architect Antoni Gaudí (1852–1926) in or near Barcelona testify to Gaudí’s exceptional creative contribution to the development of architecture and building technology in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. These monuments represent an eclectic, as well as a very personal, style which was given free reign in the design of gardens, sculpture and all decorative arts, as well as architecture. The seven buildings are: Parque Güell; Palacio Güell; Casa Mila; Casa Vicens; Gaudí’s work on the Nativity façade and Crypt of La Sagrada Familia; Casa Batlló; Crypt in Colonia Güell.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The Works of Antoni Gaudí is a serial property consisting of seven buildings by the architect Antoni Gaudí (1852–1926) located in Barcelona and its surrounding areas. The property attests to the exceptional creative contribution of this architect to the development of architecture and construction technology in the 19th and early 20th centuries. The Park Güell, the Palau Güell, the Casa Milà-La Pedrera, the Casa Vicens, the Nativity Façade and the Crypt of the Sagrada Família, the Casa Batlló, and the Crypt of the Colònia Güellreflect an eclectic, very personal style to which Gaudí gave free rein in the field of architecture, as well as in the design of gardens, sculptures, and indeed all the arts.

The Works of Antoni Gaudí is an exceptional and outstanding creative contribution to the architectural heritage of modern times. His work is rooted in the particular character of the period, drawing on the one hand from traditional Catalan patriotic sources and on the other from the technical and scientific progress of modern industry. Gaudí’s work is a remarkable reflection of all these different facets of society and has a unique and singular character. In fact, his works are particularly associated with Modernisme, and in this sense, Gaudí can be regarded as the most representative and outstanding of the Modernista architects.

Gaudí’s work is an exceptional creative synthesis of several 19th-century artistic schools, such as the Arts and Crafts movement, Symbolism, Expressionism, and Rationalism, and is directly associated with the cultural apogee of Catalonia. Gaudí also presaged and influenced many forms and techniques of 20th-century Modernism. 

Criterion (i): The work of Antoni Gaudí represents an exceptional and outstanding creative contribution to the development of architecture and building technology in the late 19th and early 20th centuries.

Criterion (ii): Gaudí's work exhibits an important interchange of values closely associated with the cultural and artistic currents of his time, as represented in el Modernisme of Catalonia. It anticipated and influenced many of the forms and techniques that were relevant to the development of modern construction in the 20th century.

Criterion (iv): Gaudí's work represents a series of outstanding examples of the building typology in the architecture of the early 20th century, residential as well as public, to the development of which he made a significant and creative contribution. 

Integrity

In general, all the component parts of the property enjoy a high degree of integrity and have retained a good relationship with their surroundings, whether urban or natural.

The Palau Güell, originally a family home, is now a cultural and tourist facility that retains its architectural integrity, form, and original decoration. The Park Güell is still used as a public park and green space, the purpose for which it was designed; now combining this with tourist and cultural use, while conserving the original features in their entirety. The Casa Milà-La Pedrera and the Casa Batlló, a pre-existing building remodelled by Gaudí, largely conserve their original design as apartment buildings, combining this in present day with other uses, such as offices and cultural and tourist facilities. Some monuments, such as the Casa Vicens, have retained over time both their physical appearance and their use as family homes. The Crypt of the church of the Colònia Güell is the only component to have been built as part of a larger project for the church. Subsequently, a temporary roof was erected over the Crypt. The present roof maintains the overall integrity of the Crypt as constructed by Gaudí. It also currently retains its use as the church of the Colònia Güell. In the case of the Sagrada Família, the integrity of the part built by Gaudí is intact. Furthermore, its current function as a church corresponds with the use originally intended, maintaining its religious symbolism and being a landmark for the city of Barcelona. 

Authenticity

In general, all the buildings by Antoni Gaudí that are part of the serial property possess a fair degree of authenticity. Restoration works have reflected these qualities in the conditions for interventions.

The Palau Güell has undergone a general restoration to improve its conservation and enhance its cultural use, highlighting the authenticity of its architectural and decorative features. The Park Güell has undergone a variety of minor and structural restorations to repair damage caused by its intensive public use and exposure to the elements. The Casa Milà-La Pedrera has been comprehensively restored to improve its state of conservation, highlight certain unique features such as the roof, attics, “noble” floor, etc., and to make it more suitable for cultural uses and public visits. The Casa Vicens has undergone only minor conservation and restoration work. The Casa Batlló has been restored to improve its state of conservation and enhance its use for cultural purposes.

At the Crypt of the Colònia Güell, the structure has been restored, preserving and consolidating Gaudí’s Crypt, substituting the stairs and the deteriorating temporary roof. The new roof is based on modern design criteria and does not interfere with visibility from the surrounding area. There were also structural problems, due to the fact that the columns were not receiving the load they were originally designed to take. Nonetheless, the work by Gaudí in the Crypt has been correctly restored and has not lost its originality.

In the case of the Sagrada Família, the authenticity of the part built by Gaudí – the Nativity Façade and the Crypt – has been preserved in terms of its material, form, and workmanship.

Construction work on the church is continuing at the present time. The work originally performed by Gaudí must be considered in the context of the overall project that he himself had planned, which is now close to being brought to completion in accordance with the evidence and guidelines that have been drawn up and scientifically verified. 

Protection and management requirements

Protection legislation includes Law 16/1985 of 25 June concerning Spanish Historical Heritage, Law 9/1993 of 30 September concerning Catalan Cultural Heritage, and Decree 276/2005 concerning Territorial Commissions for the Cultural Heritage. Legislation at the municipal level, including the Metropolitan General Plan, the Special Plan to protect the architectural heritage of the city of Barcelona, and the Special Plan to protect the architectural heritage of the Colònia Güell residential district, grants additional protection.

In terms of management, there are numerous authorities involved in decision making at the levels of the State, the Autonomous Community, and the municipality. Similarly, ownership is varied: Park Güell is owned by the Barcelona City Council, Palau Güell by the Barcelona Provincial Council, Casa Milà-La Pedrera by the Fundació Catalunya - La Pedrera, and Casa Vicens is private property. Casa Batlló is owned by Inmobiliaria Casa Batlló SL, Sagrada Família by the Board of the Sagrada Família, and the Crypt of the Colònia Güell by Colònia Güell Consortium. Management of the property also has to reconcile diverse uses such as public garden (Park Güell), culture and tourism, and religious and residential use.

The Territorial Commission for the Cultural Heritage of Barcelona and the Territorial Commission of the city of Barcelona are ultimately responsible for the management and administration of the inscribed property, in accordance with the legislative and regulatory framework. In addition, different component parts have specific conservation, maintenance, and master plans to address particular conditions. The management of the property will need to respond effectively to the increased pressure from the growing number of visitors and continue its work on the protection and restoration of the structural and decorative elements, with attention paid to the behaviour and decay processes of the materials used (iron, ceramics, etc.).

Notes

The property “Parque Güell, Palacio Güell and Casa Mila in Barcelona”, previously inscribed on the World Heritage List, is part of the “Works of Antoni Gaudí”.

Links
Crypt of the Colònia Güell

Casa Vicens

Park Güell

Palau Güell (in Spanish)

Colònia Güell

La Pedrera (in Spanish)

Casa Batlló

 View photos from OUR PLACE the World Heritage collection

Taller de Escultura Luís Gueilburt - Colección Antoni Gaudí

Activities 1
World Heritage Cities Programme
News  3
World Heritage sites participate in Earth Hour 2013
22 March 2013
World Heritage sites participate in Earth Hour
28 March 2012
Mostar, Macao and Biblical vestiges in Israel are among the 17 cultural sites inscribed on UNESCO’s World Heritage List
15 July 2005
Events  2
Bikeabout To Launch Circum-Mediterranean Tour Of World Heritage Sites
24 Sep 1997 - 30 Jun 1998
Fourth International Conferences of Gaudinist Studies
13 Jul 1997 - 15 Jul 1997
Media
play_arrow Works of Antoni Gaudí (UNESCO/NHK)
Spain
Date of Inscription: 1984
Significant modifications to the boundaries : 2005
Criteria: (i)(ii)(iv)
Dossier: 320bis
Serial: yes

Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2013 2011 2010 2009 2008
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026