World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Ancient Villages in Southern Anhui – Xidi and ...
Ancient Villages in Southern Anhui – Xidi and Hongcun
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Assistance
Ancient Villages in Southern Anhui – Xidi and Hongcun

The two traditional villages of Xidi and Hongcun preserve to a remarkable extent the appearance of non-urban settlements of a type that largely disappeared or was transformed during the last century. Their street plan, their architecture and decoration, and the integration of houses with comprehensive water systems are unique surviving examples.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis 

Xidi and Hongcun are two outstanding traditional villages, located in Yi County, Huangshan City in south Anhui Province, with commercial activities as their primary source of income, family and clan-based social organization, and well known for their regional culture. The overall layout, landscape, architectural form, decoration, and construction techniques all retain the original features of Anhui villages between the 14th and 20th centuries.

Deeply influenced by the traditional culture of pre-modern Anhui Province, these two villages, Xidi and Hongcun, were built by successful officials or merchants returning home from official appointments and business, and gradually developed into models of conventional Chinese village construction. Xidi is surrounded by mountains and built along and between three streams running east-west, which converge at the Huiyuan Bridge to the south. Hongcun is located at the foot of a hill next to a stream which forms two pools, the Moon Pond in the centre of the village and the other to the south. Characterised by rhythmic space variation and tranquil alleyways; and with water originating from a picturesque garden, the whole reflects the pursuit of coexistence, unity and the harmony of man and nature. The unique and exquisite style of Anhui buildings is conveyed in plain and elegant colors, their gables decorated with delicate and elegant carvings, their interiors filled with tasteful furnishings. The rigid patriarchal system together with gentle and sincere folk customs reflects the cultural ideas of scholar-bureaucrats in feudal society who paid special respect to Confucianism and Neo-Confucianism. These surviving villages bear scientific, cultural and aesthetic values with their 600-plus-year history. They are rich sources for the study of regional histories and cultures.

Criteria (iii) : The villages of Xidi and Hongcun are graphic illustrations of a type of human settlement created during a feudal period and based on a prosperous trading economy.

Criteria (iv) : In their buildings and their street patterns, the two villages of southern Anhui reflect the socio-economic structure of a long-lived settled period of Chinese history.

Criteria (v) : The traditional non-urban settlements of China, which have to a very large extent disappeared during the past century, are exceptionally well preserved in the villages of Xidi and Hongcun.

Integrity

Xidi and Hongcun preserve an abundant tangible and intangible cultural heritage. The current 730 hectare area (Xidi property area and buffer zone: 400 hectares, Hongcun property area and buffer zone: 330 hectares), contains an integrated ecological landscape and unique collection of village alleyways, buildings, waterways dating from the 14th century; the area also serves as a record of “Xidi and Hongcun” art, cuisine, medicine, painting and other elements of intangible cultural heritage, preserving and passing on the site’s spirit and culture.

Authenticity

Xidi and Hongcun experienced a thousand years of continuous transformation and development, all the while authentically preserving their character as traditional Chinese villages with commercial economies and clan-based social structures. The villages faithfully preserve elements that are typical of traditional pre-modern villages, including the surrounding environment, manmade waterways, the villages’ layout, architectural style, decorative arts, construction methods and materials, traditional technology and the overall appearance of the villages; additionally, the site preserves regional art, customs, cuisine, and other forms of cultural and traditional ways of life. Xidi and Hongcun are, without a doubt, ideal sites for contemporary society to seek its history, and to research traditional village culture.

Protection and management requirements

“Xidi and Hongcun” are State Priority Protected Sites, National Famous Historic and Cultural Villages. They are protected by laws including the Law of the People’s Republic of China on the Protection of Cultural Relics, the Urban and Rural Planning Law of the People’s Republic of China, the Regulations on the Protection of Historic and Cultural Towns and Villages, the Regulations on the Protection of Ancient Dwellings in Southern Anhui Province, the Management Measures of World Cultural Heritage as well as other relevant laws and regulations. Additionally, the heritage site has formulated many normative protection documents including the Management Measures for the Conservation of Xidi and Hongcun Villages, and has revised and implemented a series of special plans including the Conservation Plan for Xidi and Hongcun Villages, strengthening the monitoring and management of the heritage site and its surrounding area. The site has also established a Conservation and Management Committee, which oversees and co-ordinates the World Heritage Management Office and other dedicated management and conservation bodies, as well as creating a professional conservation team. These measures have all provided legal and administrative conservation for the authenticity and integrity of Xidi and Hongcun.

Long term plans for Xidi and Hongcun are based on the understanding that by preserving the overall spatial pattern and appearance of Xidi and Hongcun; preserving the composition of the cultural heritage property, including the village area, borders, nodes, landmark, street layout, buildings, waterways, traditional gardens, mountain and river scenic spots, and its rural landscape; maintaining the continuation and vivacity of the villages’ way of life, the long-term preservation of the cultural heritage site’s authenticity and integrity can be achieved.

Further undertakings should be conducted, including uncovering the historic and cultural resources of the site, systematically preserving the site’s non-material setting; improving infrastructure and capabilities for communication and presentation; strengthening safety and ecological support systems; improving the quality of the environment, and promoting the harmonious and friendly development of the site’s economy, society, population, resources, and development.

The management body will strictly enforce the property’s regulations for conservation and management; effectively control the capacity of the site and development activities; curb and mitigate the negative effects of development on the property; plan and coordinate the requirements of various stakeholders; construct new residences for village inhabitants outside the heritage areas and buffer zones; as well as rationally and effectively maintain the balance between measures for conservation and tourism and urban development.

Links
Official website page (in Chinese only)

Activities 1
World Heritage Cities Programme
News  2
International workshop held on strengthening south-south collaboration on World Heritage and Sustainable Tourism
5 June 2014
World Heritage Committee Inscribes 61 New Sites on World Heritage List
30 November 2000
Media
play_arrow Ancient Villages in Southern Anhui – Xidi and Hongcun (UNESCO/NHK)
China
Date of Inscription: 2000
Criteria: (iii)(iv)(v)
Property : 52 ha

Buffer zone: 730 ha
Dossier: 1002
Serial: yes

Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
Protections
by other conservation instruments

1 protection / 1 element

2003 Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage (1 element)

Traditional handicrafts of making Xuan paper

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026