World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Town Hall and Roland on the Marketplace of ...
Town Hall and Roland on the Marketplace of Bremen
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Town Hall and Roland on the Marketplace of Bremen

The Town Hall and the statue of Roland on the marketplace of Bremen in north-west Germany are outstanding representations of civic autonomy and sovereignty, as these developed in the Holy Roman Empire in Europe. The old town hall was built in the Gothic style in the early 15th century, after Bremen joined the Hanseatic League. The building was renovated in the so-called Weser Renaissance style in the early 17th century. A new town hall was built next to the old one in the early 20th century as part of an ensemble that survived bombardment during the Second World War. The statue stands 5.5 m tall and dates back to 1404.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The Town Hall and Roland on the marketplace of Bremen in north-west Germany are an outstanding representation of the civic autonomy and market rights as they developed in the Holy Roman Empire in Europe. The Old Town Hall was built as a Gothic hall structure in the early 15th century, and renovated in the so-called Weser Renaissance style in the early 17th century. A New Town Hall was built next to the old one in the early 20th century as part of an ensemble that survived the bombardments during the Second World War.

The Old Town Hall is a two-storey hall building with a rectangular floor plan, 41.5 m by 15.8 m. It is described as a transverse rectangular Saalgeschossbau (i.e. a multi-storey construction built to contain a large hall). The ground floor is formed of one large hall with oak pillars; it served for merchants and theatrical performances. The upper floor has the main festivity hall of the same dimensions. Between the windows, there are stone statues representing the emperor and prince electors, which date from the original Gothic period, integrated with late-Renaissance sculptural decoration symbolising civic autonomy. Underground, the town hall has a large wine cellar with one hall in the dimensions of the ground floor with stone pillars, which was later extended to the west and is now used as a restaurant.

In the 17th century, the Town Hall was renovated, and out of the eleven axes of the colonnade the three middle ones were accentuated by a bay construction with large rectangular windows and a high gable, an example of the so-called Weser Renaissance. An elaborate sculptural decoration in sandstone was added to the façade, representing allegorical and emblematic depictions.

The New Town Hall was the result of an architectural competition, designed by Gabriel von Seidl from Munich, and built between 1909 and 1913. The stone statue of Roland was initially erected in 1404 in representation of the rights and privileges of the free and imperial city of Bremen. The statue of Roland is associated with the Margrave of Brittany, a paladin of Charlemagne.

Criterion (iii): The Bremen Town Hall and Roland bear an exceptional testimony to the civic autonomy and sovereignty, as these developed in the Holy Roman Empire.

Criterion (iv): The Bremen Town Hall and Roland are an outstanding ensemble representing civic autonomy and market freedom. The town hall represents the medieval Saalgeschossbau-type of hall construction, as well as being an outstanding example of the so-called Weser Renaissance in Northern Germany. The Bremen Roland is the most representative and one of the oldest of Roland statues erected as a symbol of market rights and freedom.

Criterion (vi): The ensemble of the Town Hall and Roland of Bremen with its symbolism is directly associated with the development of the ideas of civic autonomy and market freedom in the Holy Roman Empire. The Bremen Roland is referred to a historical figure, paladin of Charlemagne, who became the source for the French ‘chanson de geste’ and other medieval and Renaissance epic poetry.

Integrity

While the immediate surroundings of the Town Hall have survived reasonably well, the rest of the historic town of Bremen suffered serious destruction during the Second World War, and was rebuilt in new forms after the war. The Town Hall contains all elements necessary to express the property’s Outstanding Universal Value and the size is adequate to ensure complete representation. There are no adverse impacts of development and/or neglect.

Authenticity

The Town Hall of Bremen has had various phases in its history, starting with the first construction in Gothic style, in the early 15th century, and the substantial renovation in the Baroque period in the early 17th century. Furthermore, there have been various transformations and additions in the subsequent centuries, including the construction of the New Town Hall in the early 20th century. Taking into account this historical evolution, the Town Hall can be conceived as having historical authenticity in its form and material in respect to the various periods. It has also retained its historically established spatial relationship with the neighbouring historic buildings and market squares.

The Bremen Roland is considered to be one of the oldest and most representative still standing of such statues. It has been repaired and restored numerous times, and some of the original material has been replaced, therefore losing part of its authenticity.

Protection and management requirements

The Town Hall and the Roland are under the protection of the Law for the care and protection of cultural monuments (Denkmalschutzgesetz, DSchG, 1975/ 1989)) of the Federal Land of Bremen, and are listed as historic monuments. The property has been under preservation order since 1909 (Old Town Hall) and 1973 (New Town Hall). A buffer zone has been defined to ensure the effective protection of the important views of the property. The owner of the Town Hall and the Roland is the municipality of the Free Hanseatic City of Bremen.

In the city-state of Bremen the Bremen Monuments Office (Landesamt für Denkmalpflege) is the executing agency of the aforementioned law. It functions as a specialised monument authority and has the power to decide on the approval of applications submitted by monument owners in agreement with these owners. Once an agreement is reached, the superior authority, Senator for Culture (Senator für Kultur), takes the final decision. In accordance with international conservation principles, the Town Hall has repeatedly undergone repair and maintenance. There was a comprehensive restoration of the exterior from 2001 to 2006, including re-pointing the joints and consolidating the stone parts on the façades and repair of the copper roof.

The Management Plan of the property is regularly reviewed and updated when required.

Links
Deutsche UNESCO-Kommission

Activities 1
World Heritage Cities Programme
News  2
World Heritage sites participate in Earth Hour 2013
22 March 2013
World Heritage sites participate in Earth Hour
28 March 2012
Media
play_arrow Town Hall and Roland on the Marketplace of Bremen (UNESCO/NHK)
Germany
Date of Inscription: 2004
Criteria: (iii)(iv)(vi)
Property : 0.287 ha

Buffer zone: 376 ha
Dossier: 1087
Bremen (city-state)
N53 4 33.5 E8 48 26.9
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026