World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Holašovice Historic Village
Holašovice Historic Village
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Holašovice Historic Village

Holašovice is an exceptionally complete and well-preserved example of a traditional central European village. It has a large number of outstanding 18th- and 19th-century vernacular buildings in a style known as 'South Bohemian folk Baroque', and preserves a ground plan dating from the Middle Ages.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The Holašovice Historical Village is situated in the South Bohemian Region of the Czech Republic, 17 km west of České Budějovice and 24 km north of Český Krumlov.

The village includes twenty-three farmsteads which are placed around a rectangular village green, with the chapel of St. John of Nepomuk, a cross, a forge and a small fish-pond.

Holašovice is an exceptionally complete and well preserved example of a traditional central European village, containing a number of high-quality vernacular buildings from the 18th and 19th centuries.

Almost all the farms are built according to the same pattern; usually, they are U-shaped with a farmyard in the middle. The gables facing the village green and their stucco decoration are in a style known as South Bohemian “Folk Baroque”. Almost always, they feature the year of foundation of the house as well as some decorative elements; all of it is painted in a variety of colours. In fact, on the facades, Holašovice master-builders replicated decorations inspired by manorial buildings of Bohemia and Austria. In addition to large farmsteads, the Holašovice Historic Village includes several farming houses which are much smaller.

The small chapel of St. John of Nepomuk features a high bell-shaped facade. It has a gable roof and a hip roof on one side, as well as a lantern-turret on four pillars with a bell. The interior is vaulted and closed by two lunettes. The village forge and the blacksmith's house are single-storey buildings with a gable roof. The forge features a typical arched opening overlooking the village green (now closed since the building is presently inhabited).

Criterion (ii): Holašovice is of special significance in that it represents the fusion of two vernacular building traditions to create an exceptional and enduring style, known as South Bohemian “Folk Baroque”.

Criterion (iv): The exceptional completeness and excellent preservation of Holašovice and its buildings make it an outstanding example of traditional rural settlement in central Europe.

Integrity

All the key elements which the Outstanding Universal Value of the Holašovice Historic Village is based upon are situated within its boundaries. The boundaries and the size of the property are appropriate. The historic village has a stabilised structure inside which no change is planned. Partial improvements that have been made in various buildings have had only small impact on them. As regards to the volumes and details of the new buildings, there was a consistent respect for tradition. No planned pressure exists concerning new constructions that could jeopardize the visual integrity of the conservation area, within its boundaries. The buffer zone is delimited but subject to threats coming from potential urban development that might have a serious impact on the visual context of the property and that could also jeopardize the visual integrity of the protected area as a whole.

Authenticity

The village of Holašovice is a perfectly preserved and exceptionally complete example of a central European village built on a traditional ground that includes a large number of 18th and 19th century highly valuable vernacular buildings. The village has kept its original medieval layout, land parcelling and its historical appearance. Hence, the authenticity of the layout and of the land parcelling of the village, which have been stabilized in the 19th century, is very high. This assertion is documented by the early maps produced by cadastral surveys.

A number of the individual farmsteads have preserved a substantial measure of authenticity in their internal layouts and external features. However, others have undergone radical changes, especially to their interiors, which have severely reduced their overall authenticity; this is especially applicable to the buildings used as retirement homes.

Protection and management requirements

The Holašovice Historic Village is designated a village heritage reservation under Act No. 20/1987 Coll. on State Heritage Preservation as amended. Twenty-one farmsteads around the central village green and the forge and the blacksmith's house in the centre of the village green are designated cultural heritage assets and protected under the Act mentioned above.

Most buildings that are part of the property are privately owned. In municipal ownership there are: farmstead No 18 (village pub), the forge and the blacksmith's house No 23 and house No 43), the chapel and other religious objects (crosses, sanctuaries).

The management plan of the property is in effect and is updated regularly. The property management is a responsibility of the municipality of Jankov whose administrative powers cover Holašovice. This municipality provides the maintenance, functioning and development of the property. Because of the size of the site and of the complex structure of the properties, individual maintenance schedules have been set.

The buffer zone has been defined in accordance with applicable regulations. It is identical to the protective zone of the village heritage reservation. However, the potential urban development might have an impact on the visual context of the property with the surrounding landscape. Several measures, which are integrated in the actual development plan, were taken to mitigate this risk. Precondition for new construction in major development areas is the establishment of regulatory plans, zoning plans and studies, which will determine detailed regulations in these localities.

Financial instruments for the conservation of the property namely include grant schemes and funding through the programme of the Ministry of Culture of the Czech Republic allocated to the maintenance and conservation of the immovable cultural heritage, as well as financial resources allocated from other public budgets.

Since 2000, annual monitoring reports have been prepared at the national level to serve World Heritage property manager, the Ministry of Culture, the National Heritage Institute and other agencies involved.

Links
Holašovice Historic Village official website

Vesnice Holašovice (in Czech)

Špejchar U Vojty

News  1
UNESCO World Heritage Committee Adds 30 Sites to World Heritage List
2 December 1998
Media
play_arrow Holašovice Historical Village Reservation (UNESCO/NHK)
Czechia
Date of Inscription: 1998
Criteria: (ii)(iv)
Property : 11.4 ha

Buffer zone: 367.5 ha
Dossier: 861
South Bohemian Region
N48 58 10.7 E14 16 21.4
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026