World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Thungyai-Huai Kha Khaeng Wildlife Sanctuaries
Thungyai-Huai Kha Khaeng Wildlife Sanctuaries
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Assistance
Thungyai-Huai Kha Khaeng Wildlife Sanctuaries

Stretching over more than 600,000 ha along the Myanmar border, the sanctuaries, which are relatively intact, contain examples of almost all the forest types of continental South-East Asia. They are home to a very diverse array of animals, including 77% of the large mammals (especially elephants and tigers), 50% of the large birds and 33% of the land vertebrates to be found in this region.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Thung Yai-Huai Kha Khaeng Wildlife Sanctuary World Heritage property lies in Uthai Thani, Tak, and Kanchanaburi provinces in the west of Thailand, alongside the border with Myanmar. The property combines two contiguous sanctuaries, Thung Yai Naresuan and Huai Kha Khang, separately established as sanctuaries in 1972 and 1974, respectively. Thung Yai-Huai Kha Khaeng Wildlife Sanctuary encompasses two important river systems, the Upper Khwae Yai and the Huai Khakhaeng. The property, encompassing 622,200 hectares, is the largest conservation area in Mainland Southeast Asia and is one of Thailand’s least accessible and least disturbed forest areas.

The flora and fauna of the sanctuaries include associations found nowhere else, with many species of exclusively Sino-Himalayan, Sundaic, Indo-Burmese, and Indo-Chinese affinities, intermingling within the property. Many of these are rare, endangered, or endemic. The sanctuary’s importance as a conservation area lies in the heterogeneity and integrity of its habitats, the diversity of its flora and fauna, and the complexity of its ecosystem. The property contains exceptional natural beauty and aesthetic importance with steep sided valleys and impressive mountain peaks interspersed with small lowland plains. The scenic beauty of the property is exceptional, enhanced by the sight of a host of tributary streams and waterfalls, the unique mosaic of forest types and the sweeping spectacles of variations of colour, form, and foliage.

Criterion (vii): Thung Yai-Huai Kha Khaeng Wildlife Sanctuary contains biological features of outstanding natural beauty and of great scientific value, including many natural features and two major watersheds with their associated riverine forests. Straddling the Shan – Thai folded mountains and its three distinct landforms, the property contains ridges that run parallel from north to south, rising to heights well over 1,500 meters. The tallest peak, Thung Yai, reaches 1,830 meters above sea level while the numerous valley bottoms within the sanctuary slope from 400 to 250 meters above sea level, creating stunning landscapes and encompassing superlative forest habitats.

Criterion (ix): Thung Yai-Huai Kha Khaeng Wildlife Sanctuary represents an outstanding and unique biome in mainland Southeast Asia, combining Sino-Himalayan, Sundaic, Indo-Burmese, and Indo-Chinese biogeography elements, with the flora and fauna characteristics of all four zones. The property encompasses significant ecological and biological processes, including habitats and biological features such as limestone habitats, mineral-licks, wetlands, and sink-holes. The savanna forest of Thung Yai is the most complete and secure example of Southeast Asia’s dry tropical forest.

 

Criterion (x): Thung Yai-Huai Kha Khaeng Wildlife Sanctuary has exceptional species and habitat diversity. The property supports many wild plant and animal relatives of domestic species, with many reaching the limits of their distributions in the sanctuary. Species lists have been compiled, which include 120 mammals, 400 birds, 96 reptiles, 43 amphibians, and 113 freshwater fish. In addition to many regional endemic species and some 28 internationally threatened species, at least one-third of all mainland Southeast Asia’s known mammals are represented within the boundaries of the property, providing the major stronghold for the long-term survival of many species. 

Integrity

Thung Yai-Huai Kha Khaeng Wildlife Sanctuary covers 622,200 hectares and incorporates two intact river systems whose watersheds are largely encompassed by the properties boundaries. Both banks of the rivers are well protected – a rare sight to find in Asia. The size of the property adequately ensures complete representations of habitats and ecological processes and the total area protected is larger than any other legally protected, single forest conservation area in mainland Southeast Asia.

The property incorporates near pristine examples of most of the principal inland forest formations found in continental Southeast Asia, including the dry tropical forest ecosystem, which is more critically endangered than the region’s equatorial rain forest. The continued existence of many species that are vulnerable to human threats is tangible testament to the integrity of the property. However, impacts from development pressures, dam and mining projects, which facilitate access to the property and illegal poaching, continue to impact the property. Legislation and management measures are in place to address these impacts.

Protection and management requirements

The Wild Animal Reservation and Protection Act B.E.2535 (1992), enforced by the Department of National Parks, Wildlife and Plant Conservation (DNP), provides the strongest legal framework for the protection of the property. The property combines two contiguous sanctuaries, Thung Yai Naresuan and Huai Kha Khang, separately established as wildlife sanctuaries in 1972 and 1974, respectively. Adjacent to a number of other protected areas, the property’s location provides additional protection.

Management and protection activities are carried out under the framework of the National Wildlife Conservation Master Plan, the management plan for the property, and an on-going living landscape programme that has developed active management approaches to address conservation challenges. The Thai Government allocates an annual budget for managing the property, along with permanent staff, equipment, and support to several research programmes in the area.

The legal basis for the protection of the property is adequate and DNP is responsible for management of both component areas of the property. The size and topography of the area have led to a good system of guard stations, despite constraints on sufficiently trained staff and equipment.

Maintaining long-term conservation of wildlife and keeping the ecosystems in Thung Yai – Huai Kha Khaeng Wildlife Sanctuary intact and healthy greatly depends on the quality of management. The Thai government is committed to on-going investment in enhancing protection of the property. Public support and increased investments in the management of the property have increased management capabilities.

Poaching remains one of the biggest threats to the values of the property and continues to be a problem, while deforestation in some parts of the buffer zone also remains an issue. The managing agency has introduced measures of positive management including an extensive system of guard stations and patrols. There are regular meetings between the wildlife sanctuary staff and local village chiefs to discuss conservation issues, and many nearby residents are employed as support staff.

Conservation awareness activities have been initiated, and a research facility has also been set up. Continued development pressures in the area, including agricultural development, dam projects and mining to the east and south of the property involving road construction, facilitate access to the property and enable poaching to continue.

Links
Protectedplanet.net

News  1
World Heritage sites participate in Earth Hour
28 March 2012
Events  1
50th anniversary of the World Heritage Convention - Thung Yai-Huai Kha Khaeng Wildlife Sanctuary
6 Jun 2022 - 30 Jun 2022
Thailand
Date of Inscription: 1991
Criteria: (vii)(ix)(x)
Property : 622,200 ha

Dossier: 591
Kanchanaburi, Tak and Uthai Thani provinces
N15 19 59.988 E98 55 0.012
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2000 1999 1998
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026