World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Champaner-Pavagadh Archaeological Park
Champaner-Pavagadh Archaeological Park
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Champaner-Pavagadh Archaeological Park

A concentration of largely unexcavated archaeological, historic and living cultural heritage properties cradled in an impressive landscape which includes prehistoric (chalcolithic) sites, a hill fortress of an early Hindu capital, and remains of the 16th-century capital of the state of Gujarat. The site also includes, among other vestiges, fortifications, palaces, religious buildings, residential precincts, agricultural structures and water installations, from the 8th to 14th centuries. The Kalikamata Temple on top of Pavagadh Hill is considered to be an important shrine, attracting large numbers of pilgrims throughout the year. The site is the only complete and unchanged Islamic pre-Mughal city.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
Hindi
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Champaner-Pavagadh Archaeological Park, located in the Panchmahal District of Gujarat State in north-western India, features a concentration of archaeological, historical, and living cultural heritage properties cradled in an impressive landscape. Focused on Pavagadh Hill, a volcanic formation that rises 800 m above the surrounding plains, the property includes the remains of settlements dating from the prehistoric to medieval periods, the latter represented by a hill-fortress of an early (14th-century) Hindu capital and the remains of an Islamic state capital founded in the 15th century. The large property, comprised of 12 separate areas, contains the remains of fortifications, palaces, religious buildings, residential precincts, and water-retaining installations, as well as the living village of Champaner.

This area was conquered in the 13th century by the Khichi Chauhan Rajputs, who built their first settlement on top of Pavagadh Hill and fortification walls along the plateau below the hill. The earliest built remains from this period include temples, and amongst the important vestiges are water-retention systems. The Turkish rulers of Gujarat conquered the hill-fortress in 1484. With Sultan Mehmud Begda’s decision to make this his capital, the most important historic phase of this site began. The settlement of Champaner at the foot of the hill was rebuilt and remained the capital of Gujarat until 1536, when it was abandoned.

Except for the structural remains of the main buildings and forts, most parts of the capital city remain buried and unexcavated, though the planning and integration of the essential features of a city – royal estates, utilities, religious edifices, and spaces – can be seen and interpreted. Champaner-Pavagadh’s 14th-century temples and water-retaining installations, together with the later capital city’s religious, military, and agricultural structures, represent both Hindu and Muslim architecture. Champaner’s importance as a capital and residence of a sultan are best illustrated in the Great Mosque (Jama Masjid), which became a model for later mosque architecture in India. At Champaner, the land, the people, and the built heritage are each components of a complex, and dynamic process. The Brahmanical temple of Kalika Mata (the guardian goddess of the hill) atop Pavagadh Hill is an important living shrine, attracting a large number of pilgrims from Gujarat and other parts of the country throughout the year.

Criterion (iii): The Champaner-Pavagadh Archaeological Park with its ancient architecture, temples and special water-retaining installations together with its religious, military and agricultural structures, dating back to the regional Capital City built by Mehmud Begda in the 16th century, represents cultures which have disappeared.

Criterion (iv): The structures represent a perfect blend of Hindu-Moslem architecture, mainly in the Great Mosque (Jama Masjid), which became a model for later mosque architecture in India. This special style comes from the significant period of regional sultanates.

Criterion (v): The Champaner-Pavagadh Archaeological Park is an outstanding example of a very short living capital, making the best use of its setting, topography and natural features. It is quite vulnerable due to abandonment, forest takeover and modern life.

Criterion (vi): The Champaner-Pavagadh Archaeological Park is a place of worship and continuous pilgrimage for Hindu believers.

Integrity

Within the boundaries of Champaner-Pavagadh Archaeological Park are located all the known elements necessary to express the Outstanding Universal Value of the property, including the ensemble of prehistoric and early- and late-medieval period royal, sophisticated, and ordinary settlements and building complexes. The archaeological deposits are largely unexcavated. The 1328.89-ha property is of adequate size to ensure the complete representation of the features and processes that convey its significance. The property deals with small numbers of visitors at its centrally protected monuments, but with a large number of visitors at its Brahmanical religious shrine, the Kalika Mata temple, atop the hill. The landscape and buildings are well kept and complete despite considerable structural conservation work required. The preserved architecture blends flawlessly with the surrounding cityscape, underlying and overlooking the picturesque rim of nearby hillocks. There are no perceptible threats to the cultural relics, nor does the property suffer from adverse effects owing to development and/or neglect. There are buffer zones that total 2911.74 ha.

Authenticity

The property is fully authentic in terms of its location and setting, forms and designs, and materials and substances. Structural and chemical conservation of the protected monuments and sites has been undertaken, while other monuments and archaeological remains have been left largely as they were found in order to keep the possibility open for others to understand the original attributes and value of a given heritage ensemble, and especially for future generations to develop other interpretations along current scientific lines. In a limited number of cases where the stability of a monument was under threat, minimal restoration has been undertaken, clearly demarcating and documenting the scale of restoration. No change in design, workmanship or setting was made. The attributes that sustain the Outstanding Universal Value of the property – which is the only remaining complete and unchanged Islamic pre-Mughal city – are thus truthfully and credibly expressed, and fully convey the value of the property.

Protection and management requirements

Champaner-Pavagadh Archaeological Park, whose multiple owners include the Archaeological Survey of India, the Gujarat State Forest Department, State Department of Archaeology, and State Revenue Department, Jai Kalika Temple Trust, Jain Temple Trusts, Fakir Sect Trust, and the private sector, is protected under the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains (AMASR) Act (1958) and Rules (1959), amendments (1992), and Amendment and Validation Act (2010), Gujarat Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act (1965), and Champaner-Pavagadh World Heritage Area Management Authority Act (2006), as well as various Forest Acts and the Gujarat Panchayats Act (1961). Thirty-nine monuments and sites are individually protected.

A hierarchical framework of archaeologists and conservators at the federal as well as State levels is available to inform the conservation, preservation, and management of the property. The Archaeological Survey of India works with the Champaner-Pavagadh World Heritage Area Management Authority to manage the property. The latter has been formulated under the chairmanship of the Chief Secretary to the Government of Gujarat, and to which all stakeholders are members, including the Director General of the Archaeological Survey of India. An Integrated Management Plan, as recommended by the World Heritage Committee to underpin conservation decisions and interventions, has been developed and adopted. Sustaining the Outstanding Universal Value of the property over time will require continuing to monitor the state of conservation of the property and to assess the implementation of the legal and institutional tools and the Management Plan.

Media
play_arrow Champaner-Pavagadh Archaeological Park (UNESCO/NHK)
India
Date of Inscription: 2004
Criteria: (iii)(iv)(v)(vi)
Property : 1,328.89 ha

Buffer zone: 2,911.74 ha
Dossier: 1101
Serial: yes

Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2013 2011 2010 2009 2007 2005
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026