World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Moidams – the Mound-Burial System of the Ahom ...
Moidams – the Mound-Burial System of the Ahom Dynasty
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Moidams – the Mound-Burial System of the Ahom Dynasty

Set in the foothills of the Patkai Ranges in eastern Assam, the property contains the royal necropolis of the Tai-Ahom. For 600 years, the Tai-Ahom created moidams (burial mounds) accentuating the natural topography of hills, forests and water, thus forming a sacred geography. Banyan trees and the trees used for coffins and bark manuscripts were planted and water bodies created. Ninety moidams – hollow vaults built of brick, stone or earth – of different sizes are found within the site. They contain the remains of kings and other royals together with grave goods such as food, horses and elephants, and sometimes queens and servants. The Tai-Ahom rituals of “Me-Dam-Me-Phi” and “Tarpan” are practiced at the Charaideo necropolis. While moidams are found in other areas within the Brahmaputra Valley, those found at the property are regarded as exceptional.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Moidams – the Mound-Burial System of the Ahom Dynasty are a royal mound burial necropolis established by the Tai-Ahom in northeastern India. Set in the foothills of the Patkai Ranges in eastern Assam, the property contains features sacred to the Tai-Ahom and demonstrates their funerary traditions. Led by Prince Siu-kha-pha, the Tai-Ahom migrated to present-day Assam in the 13th century and selected Charaideo as their first capital and location for the royal necropolis. For 600 years (from the 13th to the 19th centuries CE), the Tai-Ahom created moidams (“home-for-spirit”) that work with the natural features of hills, forests, and water, creating a sacred geography by accentuating the natural topography. Sacred trees were planted and water bodies were created.

Ninety moidams are found within the Charaideo necropolis, sited on elevated land. The moidams have been created by building an earth mound (Ga-Moidam) over a hollow vault constructed of brick, stone or earth (Tak), and topped by a shrine (Chou Cha Li) at the centre of an octagonal wall (Garh). This shape symbolises the Tai universe. The shrine at the top is the Mungklang, a middle space symbolised as a golden ladder establishing a heaven-earth continuum. The vaults contain the buried or cremated remains of kings and other royal individuals together with grave goods such as food, horses, and elephants, and sometimes queens and servants. The moidams within the property testify to the changes in materials and design of the burial mounds over time. This is a physical space where Tai-Ahom royals became gods, symbolising a heaven-earth continuum. The Tai-Ahom rituals of Me-Dam Me-Phi (ancestor worship) and Tarpan (libation) are practiced at the Charaideo necropolis.

Criterion (iii): Moidams – the Mound-Burial System of the Ahom Dynasty bear witness to 600 years of Tai-Ahom royal funerary architecture and customs and are a testimony to Tai-Ahom cultural traditions from the 13th to 19th centuries CE. The archaeological remains of the moidams are evidence of the architecture, layout, and manifestations of the Tai-Ahom beliefs and traditions. The continuing ritual practices of Tai-Ahom at the property are also significant in relation to this criterion.

Criterion (iv): Moidams – the Mound-Burial System of the Ahom Dynasty are an outstanding example of a Tai-Ahom necropolis that represents in a tangible way the Tai-Ahom funerary traditions and associated cosmologies. For around 600 years, the Tai-Ahom sculpted this landscape according to their cosmological beliefs. The undulating topography was accentuated by excavating ditches and marking the troughs with moidams. The natural vegetation was enhanced by planting sacred trees, and water bodies were added by channelising streams to fill them. Together these features symbolise the Tai universe, and a heaven-earth continuum.

Integrity

The property contains the most important and well-preserved Tai-Ahom royal mound burials (moidams). These are protected by national and state legal frameworks. The state of conservation is generally good, and the factors affecting the property are heavy rainfall, soil erosion and vegetation growth. The boundaries are appropriate, and the buffer zone protects the setting and other features associated with the Tai-Ahom.

Authenticity

The Charaideo necropolis is a sacred landscape with built royal burial mounds that reflect Tai-Ahom beliefs. The moidams are largely intact, as is the rural landscape setting. The Buranjis (royal chronicles) provide details of the Tai-Ahom world view and daily life, including the funerary rituals and spiritual associations, as well as details of the materials and labour required to construct the moidams.

Protection and management requirements

The property is protected by the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains (Amendment and Validation) Act of 2010, the Antiquities and Art Treasures Act, 1972, and the Assam Ancient Monuments and Records Act, 1959. The National Monument Authority and Directorate of Archaeology, Government of Assam regulate development in the buffer zone, and the Director General, Archaeological Survey of India approves application for archaeological excavation. No development is allowed within the property.

The property is jointly managed by the Assam Government’s Directorate of Archaeology (DOA) and the Archaeological Survey of India (ASI). The Group of Four Maidams is an Ancient Monument of National Importance, and the remainder of the property is the Charaideo Archaeological Site, an Ancient Monument of State Importance. Three committees have been established to ensure coordination: the State-level Apex Committee, a Local Level Committee that oversees maintenance issues, and a Ministerial Committee for overseeing works and projects.

The management system is guided by the National Policy for Conservation of the Ancient Monuments, Archaeological Sites and Remains (2014). The Site Management Plan of Moidams – the Mound-Burial System of the Ahom Dynasty (2023-2030) applies to the whole property. The Infrastructure/Protection, Preservation of Charaideo Moidams Archaeological Site five-year project focuses on improvements to visitor infrastructure. The Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains (Amendment and Validation) Act of 2010, establishes processes and requirements for Heritage Impact Assessments. Further development of the management system to include a sustainable tourism strategy and interpretation plan is needed; as well as further development of the research plan and implementation of a landscape approach to the management of the property.

Local communities regard the moidams as sacred burial sites and actively protect them. In recognition of the importance of the involvement of local communities, additional strategies for community engagement have been outlined.

News  1
UNESCO World Heritage: 24 new sites inscribed
1 August 2024
India
Date of Inscription: 2024
Criteria: (iii)(iv)
Property : 96.5 ha

Buffer zone: 793.7 ha
Dossier: 1711
N26 56 28.229 E94 52 34.86
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026