World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Tyre
Tyre
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Assistance
Tyre

According to legend, purple dye was invented in Tyre. This great Phoenician city ruled the seas and founded prosperous colonies such as Cadiz and Carthage, but its historical role declined at the end of the Crusades. There are important archaeological remains, mainly from Roman times.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Located on the southern coast of Lebanon, 83 km south of Beirut, the antique town of Tyre was the great Phoenician city that reigned over the seas and founded prosperous colonies such as Cadiz and Carthage and according to legend, was the place of the discovery of purple pigment.

From the 5th century B.C., when Herodotus of Halicarnassus visited Tyre, it was built for the most part on an island reportedly impregnable, considered one of the oldest metropolises of the world, and according to tradition founded in 2750 B.C. Tyre succumbed to the attack of Alexander of Macedonia who had blocked the straits by a dike. First a Greek city, and then a Roman city were constructed on this site, which is now a promontory.

Tyre was directly associated with several stages in the history of humanity, including the production of purple pigment reserved for royalty and nobility, the construction in Jerusalem of the Temple of Solomon, thanks to the material and architect sent by the King Hiram of Tyre; and the exploration of the seas by hardy navigators who founded prosperous trading centres as far away as the western Mediterranean, that ultimately assured a quasi-monopoly of the important maritime commerce for the Phoenician city. The historic role of Tyre declined at the end of the period of the Crusades.

In the modern town of Soûr, the property consists of two distinct sites: the one of the town, on the headland, and the one of the Necropolis of El Bass, on the continent. The site of the town comprises important archaeological vestiges, a great part of which is submerged. The most noteworthy structures are the vestiges of the Roman baths, the two palaestrae, the arena, the Roman colonnaded road, the residential quarter, as well as the remains of the cathedral built in 1127 by the Venetians and some of the walls of the ancient Crusader castle. The sector of Tyre El Bass, constituting the principal entrance of the town in antique times, comprises the remains of the necropolis, on either side of a wide monumental causeway dominated by a Roman triumphal arch dating from the 2nd century AD. Among the other vestiges are an aqueduct and the hippodrome of the 2nd century, one of the largest of the Roman world.

Criterion (iii): Metropolis of Phoenicia in past times, sung about for its great beauty, Tyre rapidly became the most important centre for maritime and land commerce in the eastern Mediterranean. The Phoenician remains reflect the power, influence and wealth of the merchants of Tyre who navigated the Mediterranean waters and filled their warehouses with goods from their extensive colonies all around the Mediterranean coasts.

Criterion (vi): Tyre is associated with the important stages of humanity. Astute navigators and merchants, the Phoenicians were reputed to have given birth to the great figures of mythology  including Cadmos, credited for the introduction of the alphabet to Greece and his sister, Europe, who gave her name to the European continent.

Integrity

As the exact boundaries of the site have not yet been formally approved, it must be assumed that the zones protected by the national legislation, as documented by the town plan, are assimilated into the inscribed property and include the essential attributes of the Outstanding Universal Value of the property. However, the physical vestiges of the aqueduct and some areas of the ancient necropolis, not cleared and still buried, located outside the protected area, are also attributes of the Outstanding Universal Value. As the overall archaeological prospection is incomplete, the full extent of the potential elements is not definite.

During the period of civil war (1975-1991), the urban development of Tyre progressed uncontrolled by the authorities and consequently numerous tower constructions were built in the immediate vicinity of the property. The integrity of the property is still threatened by urban sprawl and building speculation.

Authenticity

The key attributes of the property – the imposing ruins from the Roman city and the mediaeval construction of the Crusades on the former island, and on the mainland the necropolis, monumental way, aqueduct and hippodrome - reflect the former glory of Tyre. They are however highly vulnerable to lack of conservation and to development pressures that could weaken their ability to convey fully the significance of Tyre as powerful port city.

Protection and management requirements (2009)

The property is protected by the Antiquities Law No. 166/1933, and the Law on Protection of Cultural Property, No 37/2008. The conservation and management of the property is assured by the Directorate General of Antiquities (DGA). A Protection and Enhancement Plan is being prepared. The goal of this project is to ensure an improved presentation of the unique vestiges and to develop a new system for protection of the property that respects the international charters. A master plan for the town is already approved. It aims to provide maximum protection to the area surrounding the property and counter the phenomenon of urban sprawl that seriously affects the listed archaeological zone. The DGA controls all the construction and restoration permits. The Cultural Heritage and Urban Development project (CHUD) financed by the World Bank covers a large part of the measures necessary for the protection and management of the property.

Conditions for the safeguarding of the property are the definition of the non aedificandi zones of land belonging to the State and the ban on the construction of buildings of more than three storeys in the immediate vicinity of the protected monumental vestiges.

Activities 1
World Heritage Cities Programme
News  4
UNESCO Beirut organizes a technical workshop on the conservation and restoration works of Baalbek and Tyre World Heritage sites
12 May 2017
UNESCO Mission reports on war damage to cultural heritage in Lebanon
19 September 2006
UNESCO sends experts to carry out technical assessment of the effects of the war on Lebanon’s cultural heritage
8 September 2006
UNESCO Director-General launches “heritage alert” for the Middle East
11 August 2006
Lebanon
Date of Inscription: 1984
Criteria: (iii)(vi)
Property : 153.8 ha

Dossier: 299
City and District of Tyre, Governorate of South Lebanon
N33 16 09 E35 11 45
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2025 2023 2021 2019 2017 2015 2013 2012 2011 2010 2009 2008 2007 2006 2004 2003 2002 2001 1999 1998 1997 1996 1995 1992
Protections
by other conservation instruments

1 protection / 1 element

RAMSAR (1 element)

Tyre Beach

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026