World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Ivrea, industrial city of the 20th century
Ivrea, industrial city of the 20th century
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Ivrea, industrial city of the 20th century

The industrial city of Ivrea is located in the Piedmont region and developed as the testing ground for Olivetti, manufacturer of typewriters, mechanical calculators and office computers. It comprises a large factory and buildings designed to serve the administration and social services, as well as residential units. Designed by leading Italian urban planners and architects, mostly between the 1930s and the 1960s, this architectural ensemble reflects the ideas of the Community Movement (Movimento Comunità). A model social project, Ivrea expresses a modern vision of the relationship between industrial production and architecture.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Founded in 1908 by Camillo Olivetti, the Industrial City of Ivrea is an industrial and socio-cultural project of the 20th century. The Olivetti Company manufactured typewriters, mechanical calculators and desktop computers. Ivrea represents a model of the modern industrial city and a response to the challenges posed by rapid industrial change. It is therefore able to exhibit a response and a contribution to 20th century theories of urbanism and industrialisation. Ivrea’s urban form and buildings were designed by some of the best-known Italian architects and town-planners of the period from the 1930s to the 1960s, under the direction of Adriano Olivetti. The city is comprised of buildings for manufacturing, administration, social services and residential uses, reflecting the ideas of the Movimento Comunità (Community Movement) which was founded in Ivrea in 1947 based on Adriano Olivetti’s 1945 book l’Ordine politico delle Comunità (The Political Order of Communities). The industrial city of Ivrea therefore represents a significant example of 20th century theories of urban development and architecture in response to industrial and social transformations, including the transition from mechanical to digital industries.

Criterion (iv): The industrial city of Ivrea is an ensemble of outstanding architectural quality that represents the work of Italian modernist designers and architects and demonstrates an exceptional example of 20th century developments in the design of production, taking into account changing industrial and social needs. Ivrea represents one of the first and highest expressions of a modern vision in relation to production, architectural design and social aspects at a global scale in relation to the history of industrial construction, and the transition from mechanical to digitalised industrial technologies.

The attributes of the property are: the spatial plan of the industrial city, the public buildings and spaces, and residential buildings developed by Olivetti (including their extant interior elements). The influences of the Community Movement on the provision of buildings for residential and social purposes is an important intangible element, although the functions of most non-residential buildings have ceased.

Integrity

The integrity of this urban area is based on the inclusion of the buildings, spaces and urban form required to convey the significance of Ivrea’s 20th century development. The state of conservation of the city’s components is variable. Many of the residential buildings exhibit a good/adequate state of conservation. However, the integrity of the property is considered to be vulnerable due to many factors and pressures including the encroachment of new urban developments, the deteriorating condition of some key industrial buildings and building interiors, the existence of some visually intrusive new constructions inside the property boundary and its buffer zone, and loss of the original activities and purposes due to the decline in manufacturing. The high number of vacant buildings and the need to find new uses also contribute to Ivrea’s vulnerable integrity.

Authenticity

The authenticity of Ivrea is based on the high number and quality of urban and architectural projects that date to the primary period of Ivrea’s development as an industrial city. A detailed analysis of the individual components in terms of their form, design and materials, and their location and immediate environment has been undertaken, and many elements have maintained their original characteristics in spite of the changes to production that affected the city during the last two decades. While many residential, administrative and services buildings are intact, others have been renovated; and a large number of the buildings are currently vacant, with an uncertain future. There is a risk of gradual loss of the authenticity of the property due to large-scale refurbishment proposals, decay of the exterior finishing of the facades and deterioration of the interior decoration and detailing. Efforts have been made to develop new uses that are similar in type to their original uses (such as telecommunications, production or cultural activities).

Protection and management requirements

Ivrea is protected according to legislative regimes at the national, regional and local levels. These include the national Cultural Heritage and Landscape Code (revised in 2004); the Regional Landscape and Cultural Heritage Code and the Regional Landscape Plan (2015); and the Ivrea Land Use Plan (2006). National protection for Ivrea is in place only for some buildings, and is still to be completed. The system of legal protection is complex and multi-tiered, with a heavy reliance on the commitment, resources and expertise of both national and municipal authorities. Improved streamlining and coordination between the local, regional and national institutions is needed. The protection of the visual integrity of the property and its buffer zone will be strengthened by the adoption by Ivrea Council of the regulation of the regional landscape plan, integrating the guidelines and prescriptions directly relating to the protection, safeguard and enhancement of the property into the municipal regulations by October 2019. The municipal technical service department directly responds to proposed projects and grants authorisations, taking account of national, regional and local designations for buildings and landscape (for the buffer zone).

Challenges to the long-term conservation of the Outstanding Universal Value of Ivrea arise in relation to the resourcing of conservation and the need for new uses throughout the city’s elements. 44% of the former industrial and corporate buildings of the property are vacant or underused, and there are short-term needs for maintenance strategies. Engagement with residents and other users is an ongoing priority. Currently visitor levels are low, and there are plans to increase tourism capacity.

The Management Plan was updated in September 2017, and outlines a number of short and longer-term Action Plans for protection, conservation and documentation; capacity building; communication and education; and presentation. The management system includes a Steering Committee chaired by the Mayor; Technical Advisory Boards appointed by the Steering Committee; and the Site Coordinator. The General Secretary of the Municipality of Ivrea is the operating representative who coordinates all the municipal departments involved in the delivery of the actions in the management plan. The Municipality of Banchette has signed a Memorandum of Understanding to implement the Management Plan in relation to the small area occurring within its boundaries.
Links
Linkedin page

Facebook page

Instagram page

Official website of Ivrea

Activities 1
World Heritage Cities Programme
News  2
World Heritage Committee has inscribed a total of 19 sites
4 July 2018
Two sites added to UNESCO’s World Heritage List
1 July 2018
Italy
Date of Inscription: 2018
Minor boundary modification inscribed year: 2021
Criteria: (iv)
Property : 52.37 ha

Buffer zone: 278.32 ha
Dossier: 1538bis
N45 27 27 E7 52 9
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026