World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Paris, Banks of the Seine
Paris, Banks of the Seine
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Paris, Banks of the Seine

From the Louvre to the Eiffel Tower, from the Place de la Concorde to the Grand and Petit Palais, the evolution of Paris and its history can be seen from the River Seine. The Cathedral of Notre-Dame and the Sainte Chapelle are architectural masterpieces while Haussmann's wide squares and boulevards influenced late 19th- and 20th-century town planning the world over.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The city of Paris is built along a bend in the River Seine, between the confluence of the Marne and the Oise Rivers. The property comprises bridges, quays and the banks of the Seine in the historic part of its course (between the Pont de Sully and the Pont d’Iéna) and the Ile de la Cité and the Ile St Louis. The mastery of the architecture and town planning along the river is evident in the articulation of the Ile de la Cité and Ile St Louis with its banks, the creation of North-South thoroughfares, the installations along the river course, the construction of quays and the channelling of the river. The ensemble, regarded as a geographical and historical entity, forms an exceptional and unique example of urban riverside architecture, where the different layers of the history of Paris, the capital city of one of the first great nation states of Europe, are harmoniously superposed.

From the Ile St Louis to the Pont Neuf, from the Louvre to the Eiffel Tower, and the Place de la Concorde to the Grand and Petit Palais, the evolution of Paris and its history can be seen from the River Seine. A large number of major monuments of the French capital are built alongside the river and on the perspectives overlooking it. The Cathedral of Notre-Dame and the Sainte Chapelle are architectural masterpieces of the Middle Ages; the Pont Neuf illustrates the spirit of French Renaissance; the coherence of the districts of the Marais and the Ile-Saint-Louis testify to Parisian town planning of the 17th and 18th centuries; finally, the banks of the river comprise the most masterful constructions of French classicism, with the Palais de Louvre, the Invalides, the Ecole Militaire and the Monnaie (the Mint). The conserved buildings of the Universal Exhibitions that took place in Paris in the 19th and 20th centuries are numerous on the banks of the River Seine. Heading the list is the Eiffel Tower, a universally recognized icon of Paris and of iron architecture. The Ile Saint Louis, the Quai Malaquais and the Quai Voltaire offer examples of coherent architectural and urban ensembles, with very significant examples of Parisian construction of the 17th and 18th centuries. The large squares and avenues built by Haussmann at the time of Napoleon III have influenced town planning throughout the world.

Criterion (i) : The banks of the Seine are studded with a succession of architectural and urban masterpieces built from the Middle Ages to the 20th century, including the Cathedral of Notre-Dame and the Sainte Chapelle, the Louvre, the Palais de l’Institut, the Hôtel des Invalides, Place de la Concorde, Ecole Militaire, the Monnaie (the Mint), the Grand Palais of the Champs Elysées, the Eiffel Tower and the Palais de Chaillot.

Criterion (ii) : Buildings along the Seine, such as Notre-Dame and the Sainte Chapelle, became the source of the spread of Gothic architecture, while the Place de la Concorde and the vista at the Invalides exerted influence on urban development of European capitals. Haussmann’s urban planning, which marks the western part of the city, inspired the construction of the great cities of the New World, in particular in Latin America. Finally, the Eiffel Tower and the Grand and Petit Palais, the Pont Alexandre III and the Palais de Chaillot are the living testimony of the universal exhibitions, which were of such great importance in the 19th and 20th centuries.

Criterion (iv) : United by a grandiose river landscape, the monuments, the architecture and the representative buildings along the banks of the Seine in Paris each illustrate with perfection, most of the styles, decorative arts and building methods employed over nearly eight centuries.

Integrity

Paris is a river city. Ever since the first human settlements, from prehistoric times to the Parisii tribes, the Seine has played both a defensive and an economic role. The present historic city, which developed between the 16th and 20th centuries, expresses the evolution of the relationship between the river and the city. The well-defined area between the Pont de Sully and the Pont d’Iéna is based on the age-old distinction between upstream and downstream. Upstream, the port and river transport; downstream, royal and aristocratic Paris. It is this latter section of the Seine, where functions of the capital city have developed, that was inscribed. The presence of the State through its achievements and legislation has enabled the preservation of the property in its entire integrity.

Authenticity

The completion and consolidation of the riverside, urban and monumental vistas of Paris date from the first half of the 20th century, with the Palais de Tokyo and the Palais de Chaillot. The urban and visual integrity of the site (wide perspectives from the banks) is vulnerable to the pressures of urban development, traffic pollution and tourism, and requires a rigorous control to maintain intact its Outstanding Universal Value.

Protection and management requirements

The ensemble of the property enjoys the highest level of legal protection (Heritage Code, Town Planning Code, Environment Code). The property is in an inscribed site, and further comprises six listed sites, notably the Invalides, as well as the Champs de Mars and the Jardins de Trocadéro. Regarding the Historic Monuments, all the important monuments are fully listed.

The State owns, directly or through its public establishments, the quays of the Seine (fluvial public domain), the majority of the monuments and their associated spaces. The city of Paris owns the public areas, the Hôtel de Ville, the parish churches and numerous other plots of land and buildings.

There is no management plan or management authority specifically devoted to the World Heritage property. However, due to the legal and regutory protection, management by the owner or tenants is scientifically and technically controlled by the State. 

The “Cahier des prescriptions urbaines et paysagères pour la mise en valeur des Berges de la Seine dans Paris” (Urban and Landscape Requirements for the Enhancement of the Banks of the Seine in Paris), prepared in 1999 by the city, the State and the autonomous Port, is the reference document for all activity and installations on the banks. The “Specifications de prescription des installations saisonnières” (Seasonal Installation Requirements), approved in 2015, aims to control the temporary use and occupation of the thoroughfares of the lower quays of the banks of the Seine in Paris. The definitive closing of the lower quays to automobile traffic over nearly the whole area of the property, since 2014 on the Left Bank and 2016 on the Right Bank, as part of the development of the banks of the Seine, contributes to preserving its authenticity and integrity.

Links
Tourism office

 View photos from OUR PLACE the World Heritage collection

Website of the city of Paris

Activities 2
World Heritage Cities Programme
UNESCO Urban Heritage Atlas: Cultural mapping of historic cities and settlements| Paris, Banks of the Seine (France)
News  7
Advancing People- and Heritage-Centred Smart Cities: New case studies on the UNESCO Urban Heritage Atlas
31 October 2025
Fire and water: Notre Dame and Decorated Farmhouses of Hälsingland united by artist Mikaela Steby Stenfalk
8 December 2022
UNESCO to conduct an Advisory mission to Notre Dame Cathedral in Paris
25 March 2022
Notre Dame: One year after the fire
14 April 2020
More add
Media
play_arrow NHK World Heritage 100 Series
play_arrow Paris, Banks of the Seine (UNESCO/NHK)
play_arrow Paris, Banks of the Seine (UNESCO/NHK)
France
Date of Inscription: 1991
Minor boundary modification inscribed year: 2024
Criteria: (i)(ii)(iv)
Property : 538 ha

Buffer zone: 3,194 ha
Dossier: 600bis
Ile de France
N48 51 55.8 E2 19 16.1
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2025 2024 2023 2021 2019 2000 1992
Protections
by other conservation instruments

1 protection / 2 elements

2003 Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage (2 elements)

Scribing tradition in French timber framing
The art of glass beads

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026