World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Quseir Amra
Quseir Amra
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Assistance
Quseir Amra

Built in the early 8th century, this exceptionally well-preserved desert castle was both a fortress with a garrison and a residence of the Umayyad caliphs. The most outstanding features of this small pleasure palace are the reception hall and the hammam, both richly decorated with figurative murals that reflect the secular art of the time.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Built in the early 8th century beside the Wadi Butum, a seasonal watercourse, this desert establishment was both a fortress with a garrison and a residence/pleasure palace of the Umayyad caliphate. The exceptionally well-preserved, small pleasure palace comprises a reception hall and hammam (a bath complex with changing room, warm and hot rooms), all richly decorated with figurative murals that reflect the secular art of the time.

The extensive fresco paintings of the bath building and reception hall are unique for Islamic architecture of the Umayyad period. The wall paintings show influences from classical pagan themes, Byzantine style portraits and hunting scenes, depictions of animals and birds, and are accompanied by inscriptions in Greek and Arabic. The representation of the zodiac on the domed ceiling of the caldarium (hot room) is one of the earliest known, surviving portrayals of a map of the heavens on a dome.

The desert establishment, of which this pleasure palace forms part, was one of several created in the semi-arid area east of Amman for the purpose of interacting with the tribal region of the Wadi Butum. As such, Quseir Amra is an outstanding example of a particular type of architectural ensemble which relates specifically to the administrative strategy of the first Islamic caliphate.

Criterion (i): The Quseir Amra paintings constitute a unique artistic achievement in the Umayyad Period. The extensive fresco paintings of the reception hall and bath building, in creating a place of relaxation for the Prince away from earthly cares, provides new insight to early Islamic art and its derivation from classical and Byzantine precedents. The zodiac dome, human portraits and depictions of animals and birds in the hunting scenes are found only in this early period of Islamic art.

Criterion (iii): Quseir Amra bears exceptional testimony to the Umayyad civilization which was imbued with a pre-Islamic secular culture and whose austere religious environment left little trace in the visual arts.

Criterion (iv): Together with the remains of the fort/garrison buildings several hundred metres to the north and traces of agricultural water catchment works, the fresco-painted bath building with its reception hall and adjacent well, tank and water-lifting hydraulic system, drainage pipes and cesspool represent an outstanding example of an Umayyad desert establishment.

In view of the fact that the relief decorations of the monumental frontal façade of Qasr el Mushatta were sent to the Berlin Museum and that the ruins of Qasr al Khayr al-Sharqui and Qasr al-Khayr al-Gharbi contain few decorative elements, Qusair Amra remains, together with Qasr Hisham and its mosaics, the best preserved of the decorated Umayyad palaces and castles in Jordan and Syria.

Integrity (2010)

The most significant elements of the property comprising the bath building and reception hall with their frescos remain intact.

The monument is vulnerable to erosion due to desert sandstorms and seasonal flooding of the water course on which it is located. A tree-planting project to the east and north of the property was aimed at reducing the impact of the arid desert, and a flood mitigation project has involved the construction of a diversion dyke to the west of the property. A huge modern reservoir was constructed to collect the flood and use the water to irrigate the forested area. These measures have been successful.

The location and condition of the building renders it subject to moisture penetration, which in turn is affecting the integrity of the wall paintings, causing deposition of salts and detachment of plaster at the base of the wall. The wall paintings are vulnerable to seasonal humidity and condensation due to increased numbers of visitors.

The paintings are also vulnerable due to the ageing of some of the products used in a 1970s restoration project, the accumulation of new dirt, graffiti, and deposits produced by birds and insects.

The setting of the monument, once a peaceful haunt of gazelles and other wildlife that came to the seasonal pools in the wadi bed shaded by patches of Butut (terebinth) trees that gave the watercourse its name, is now subject to noise and pollution from the highway constructed about 150 metres to the east.

Authenticity (2010)

The Outstanding Universal Value of the property is conveyed by the bath building and reception hall and their wall paintings and remnant mosaic floors. It is also conveyed by the context of the building which includes the adjacent well, tank and water-lifting system, the fort/garrison to the north, the remnant agricultural water collection structures and the desert environment with its seasonal watercourses.

These attributes require ongoing conservation and careful management of the requirements of increased tourism. The paintings have been subject to restoration programs in the 1970s and 1990s and a further program is envisaged. The setting now includes a visitor centre on the northern edge of the buffer zone and a solar-powered water pumping station 400 metres to the north-east.

Protection and management requirements (2010)

The property is a protected area under the Antiquities Law of 1935 Article 8 and the provisional law of 1976.

There is currently no management plan but there is a management operation. The site is managed by the Ministry of Tourism and Antiquities through its local office at Zara. Staff from the Department of Antiquities in Amman including an archaeologist, an architect, a foreman and four unskilled workmen carries out regular monitoring services and minor repairs and maintenance. The property is totally fenced and security is maintained by four permanent guards.

The Department of Antiquities is currently in discussion with the authorized departments regarding land cadastre surveying for the establishment of an expanded protection zone around the property for up to approximately 2,000 dunums (two million square metres).

Regulations will be developed in cooperation with the local municipality and Ministry of Agriculture to control future development and tree-planting.

Media
Jordan
Date of Inscription: 1985
Criteria: (i)(iii)(iv)
Property : 0.0445 ha

Dossier: 327
Eastern desert – Az Zarqa' Governorate
N31 48 06.5 E36 35 14.3
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

1998 1997 1994
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026