World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Vézelay, Church and Hill
Vézelay, Church and Hill
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Vézelay, Church and Hill

Shortly after its foundation in the 9th century, the Benedictine abbey of Vézelay acquired the relics of St Mary Magdalene and since then it has been an important place of pilgrimage. St Bernard preached the Second Crusade there in 1146 and Richard the Lion-Hearted and Philip II Augustus met there to leave for the Third Crusade in 1190. With its sculpted capitals and portal, the Madeleine of Vézelay – a 12th-century monastic church – is a masterpiece of Burgundian Romanesque art and architecture.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The church of St Mary Magdalene is a former French abbey established in Vézelay in Burgundy-Franche-Comté, in the department of Yonne. Located on a high hill, still called the “eternal hill", this landmark of Christianity of the Middle Ages can be seen from afar.

Established in the 9th century as a Benedictine abbey, the church became famous in the mid-11th century when the belief spread that it held the relics of St Mary Magdalene. It became a place of pilgrimage, all the more popular because it was located on one of the roads leading to Santiago de Compostela. The city benefited from the influx of pilgrims, as in the 12th century its population was between 8,000 and 10,000 inhabitants, a considerable number for the time. Vézelay then became a centre of great importance for the West. In 1146, St Bernard preached the Second Crusade there before King Louis VII, Queen Eleanor and a throng of nobles, prelates and people gathered on the hill. In 1190, Richard the Lion-Hearted and Philip Augustus met there to leave for the Third Crusade. In 1217, Francis of Assisi chose the hill of Vézelay to found the first Franciscan establishment on French soil.

The church of St Mary Magdalene is also a masterpiece of Burgundian Romanesque art as exemplified by its architecture, capitals and carved portal. The central nave (1120-1140), slightly distorted by the downward thrust of the groined vaults, is punctuated by its large horseshoe arches of dual-coloured voussoirs, and capitals which are unique in style and the variety of subjects portrayed (profane allegories, biblical and hagiographic scenes). But it is the sculpted portal between the nave and the narthex which has brought universal fame to Vézelay.  The tympanum bears the "Mission of the Apostles", which, proceeding from an encyclopaedic inspiration, is revealing of the state of science during this period. The entire scene is organized around Christ in Glory blessing the apostles and assigning them the mission of converting the nations. This theme is quite unique in Romanesque art.

Criterion (i): The church of St Mary Magdalene of Vézelay is a masterpiece of Burgundian Romanesque art. The central nave (1120-1140), effectively punctuated by its two-tone arch ribs, is adorned with a series of capitals unique in style and variety of subjects. Its carved portal placed between the nave and narthex, with, notably, the tympanum of the “Mission of the Apostles", makes it one of the major monuments of Western Romanesque art.

Criterion (vi): In the 12th century, the hill of Vézelay was a choice location where medieval Christian spirituality, reaching a sort of paroxysm, gave rise to various and specific expressions, from prayer and chanson de geste to the Crusades.

Integrity

Vézelay, the "eternal hill", has retained intact the landscape qualities of the site where its abbey was founded in the Early Middle Ages. It is dominated by the abbey church, the existence and activity of which gave rise to the town which ends at the foot of the slope. Beyond spread fields, meadows and forests.

Authenticity

The Revolution and its consequences resulted in the disappearance of the major part of the abbey, with the exception of the abbey church. In a state close to ruin, this was the first restoration site led by Eugène Viollet-le-Duc, one of the fathers of monumental restoration, who managed to save the edifice (1839-1848) by rebuilding part of its vaults.

Protection and management requirements

Inscribed in 1840 on the first List of Historic Monuments of France, the church of Vézelay is one of the first medieval buildings whose conservation was undertaken proactively, due solely to its historic and artistic merits. Since then, an entire set of protection measures, taken in application of the Heritage Code (historic monuments, outstanding heritage site) or the Environmental Code (listed site) has been progressively developed, which apply to the church, the village, the hill and the surrounding landscape. The property is protected by a buffer zone of 18,373 ha, which corresponds to sites listed under the Environmental Code. The property, its buffer zone and the surrounding landscape are therefore protected from potential development pressures.

The church and the public spaces of Vézelay belong to the commune, which is responsible for their conservation and development, under the scientific and technical control of the State.

A major site operation is underway to improve visitor flow management and vehicular traffic around the property.

The landscape integrity of the property receives special attention from the State services in order to reconcile the preservation of Outstanding Universal Value with the objectives of energy transition. The management plan for the property is under preparation.

Links
Mairie de Vézelay (in French only)

Département Yonne, Opération Grand Site de Vézelay (in French only)

Basilique de Vézelay (only in French)

Facebook page

Vézelay Tourist Office

Media
play_arrow NHK World Heritage 100 Series
play_arrow Vézelay, Church and Hill (UNESCO/NHK)
France
Date of Inscription: 1979
Minor boundary modification inscribed year: 2007
Criteria: (i)(vi)
Property : 183 ha

Buffer zone: 18,373 ha
Dossier: 84bis
Serial: yes

Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026