World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Tr’ondëk-Klondike
Tr’ondëk-Klondike
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Tr’ondëk-Klondike
Located along the Yukon River in the sub-arctic region of Northwest Canada, Tr’ondëk-Klondike lies within the homeland of the Tr’ondëk Hwëch’in First Nation. It contains archaeological and historic sources that reflect Indigenous people’s adaptation to unprecedented changes caused by the Klondike Gold Rush at the end of the 19th century. The series illustrates different aspects of the colonization of this area, including sites of exchange between the Indigenous population and the colonists, and sites demonstrating the Tr’ondëk Hwëch’in’s adaptations to colonial presence.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Tr’ondëk-Klondike is located in the homeland of the Tr’ondëk Hwëch’in, in north-western Canada. It is a serial property that includes eight component parts: Fort Reliance; Ch’ëdähdëk (Forty Mile); Ch’ëdähdëk Tth’än K’et (Dënezhu Graveyard); Fort Cudahy and Fort Constantine; Tr’ochëk; Dawson City; Jëjik Dhä Dënezhu Kek’it (Moosehide Village); and Tthe Zrąy Kek’it (Black City). These have been significant resource and cultural areas for the Tr’ondëk Hwëch’in’s ancestors for thousands of years and were fundamentally transformed during the colonial occupation of these lands. Collectively, the geographical, structural, and archaeological evidence of the Tr’ondëk-Klondike serial property represents a rare and exceptionally preserved tangible illustration of dramatic modifications of land use, settlement patterns, and economy caused by the rapid and large scale of the colonising incursion of newcomers into the ancestral land of the Tr’ondëk Hwëch’in in search of gold and precious minerals. It also testifies to the intense upheaval that impacted the Indigenous people between 1874 and 1908, their dispossession from, and marginalisation in, their ancestral land, as well as their response and adaptation to the progressive colonial affirmation of the newly established Dominion of Canada. The component parts are also places where, through the endurance and revival of traditions, the Tr’ondëk Hwëch’in have fostered and maintained their distinct cultural identity.

Criterion (iv): Tr’ondëk-Klondike includes archaeological immovable remains, built structures and settlement patterns that illustrate the dramatic encounter triggered by the feverish search for precious metals between the Indigenous population and outsiders in a sub-arctic region, the colonial affirmation of the latter over the lands, resources and people, and the Indigenous people’s response to these events, in the late 19th century. Tr’ondëk-Klondike stands out as a very rare occurrence and provides remarkable evidence of growing colonial influence within a concentrated timeframe – from the construction of the first commercial fur-trading post at Fort Reliance in 1874, to the Klondike Gold Rush of 1896-1898, and, ultimately, the consolidation of colonial authority by 1908.

Integrity

Tr’ondëk-Klondike falls entirely within the homeland of the Tr’ondëk Hwëch’in. All the elements necessary to demonstrate the integrity of Tr’ondëk-Klondike – composed of encampments and harvesting sites, buildings, artefacts, and buried archaeological features – are found within the boundaries of the serial property, which is of adequate size to convey the property’s Outstanding Universal Value. Key elements of the landscape setting that provide functional links among component parts are included in the buffer zones, whilst expansive views and viewsheds from component parts over the riverine landscape, the surrounding hills and mountains that contribute to the understanding of the Outstanding Universal Value are part of the wider setting. As a whole, the property does not suffer from the adverse effects of development or neglect. The physical evidence that transmits the Outstanding Universal Value of Tr’ondëk-Klondike is in good condition and the property’s component parts are protected and managed under appropriate legislation and policy, with no component part exposed to unplanned or unregulated developments.

Authenticity

The authenticity of Tr’ondëk-Klondike is confirmed in the location and setting, changing land uses, and patterns of settlement by the Tr’ondëk Hwëch’in in response to the incursion of foreigners into their homeland. The property includes evidence related to both foreign colonial actors and Indigenous people that demonstrates extreme and rapid socio-economic change, as well as an active continuation of cultural traditions, resource use, and established settlement patterns. The authenticity of Tr’ondëk-Klondike is supported through Tr’ondëk Hwëch’in’s stories and oral history about the property, the assessment and reporting on the archaeological and historical resources, and archival and documentary records. Authenticity is also confirmed by language and other forms of intangible heritage, such as place names and the traditions, laws and customs of the Tr'ondëk Hwëch'in known as ‘Tr’ëhudè’, and the landscape setting and views from and over the Tr’ondëk-Klondike serial property.

Protection and management requirements

The property is subject to a strong and comprehensive legislative and jurisdictional framework, across four levels of government, that protects the historic and archaeological resources of Tr’ondëk-Klondike. Protection and management of the serial property is secured through Tr’ondëk Hwëch’in, territorial, federal, and municipal legislation and policies. Tr’ondëk Hwëch’in’s legislation is consistent with traditional governance, traditional practices, community planning, and conservation policies.

Territorial, federal, and municipal laws and policies contribute to the protection, conservation practices, management, and legal recognition of community-based planning and formal designation of historic sites. All component parts are designated as either national, territorial, or municipal historic sites or protected burial sites, or identified in the Tr’ondëk Hwëch’in Final Agreement, which outlines provisions of protection and management. The Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) concerning the Joint Management and Protection of Tr’ondëk-Klondike and the “Tr’ondëk–Klondike World Heritage Site Management Plan” provide a framework for the four levels of government that have regulatory, management, or administrative responsibilities for the property. The management plan describes principles, objectives and responsibilities of each partner and relies on existing management plans for individual designated heritage sites.

Long-term protection and management challenges for the property include the effects of climate change and other environmental factors; the decision-making process has been strengthened to avoid threats from mineral exploitation.

Canada
Date of Inscription: 2023
Criteria: (iv)
Property : 334.54 ha

Buffer zone: 356 ha
Dossier: 1564
Serial: yes

Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026