World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Hopewell Ceremonial Earthworks
Hopewell Ceremonial Earthworks
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Hopewell Ceremonial Earthworks
This property is a series of eight monumental earthen enclosure complexes built between 2,000 and 1,600 years ago along the central tributaries of the Ohio River. They are the most representative surviving expressions of the Indigenous tradition now referred to as the Hopewell culture. Their scale and complexity are evidenced in precise geometric figures as well as hilltops sculpted to enclose vast, level plazas. There are alignments with the cycles of the Sun and the far more complex cycles of the Moon. These earthworks served as ceremonial centres and the sites have yielded finely crafted ritual objects fashioned from exotic raw materials obtained from distant places.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Hopewell Ceremonial Earthworks is a series of eight monumental earthen enclosure complexes built between 2,000 and 1,600 years ago along the central tributaries of the Ohio River in east-central North America. They are the most representative surviving expressions of the Indigenous tradition now referred to as the Hopewell culture. Their scale and complexity are evidenced in precise geometric figures as well as hilltops sculpted to enclose vast, level plazas. Huge earthen squares, circles, and octagons are executed with a precision of form, technique, and dimension consistently deployed across a wide geographic region. There are alignments with the cycles of the Sun and the far more complex cycles of the Moon. These earthworks served as ceremonial centres, built by dispersed, non-hierarchical groups whose way of life was supported by a mix of foraging and farming. The sites were the centre of a continent-wide sphere of influence and interaction, and have yielded finely crafted ritual objects fashioned from exotic raw materials obtained from distant places.

Criterion (i): Hopewell Ceremonial Earthworks comprises highly complex masterpieces of landscape architecture. They are exceptional amongst ancient earthworks worldwide not only in their enormous scale and wide geographic distribution, but also in their geometric precision. These features imply high-precision techniques of design and construction and an observational knowledge of complex astronomical cycles that would have required generations to codify. The series includes the finest extant examples of these various principles, shapes, and alignments, both in geometric earthworks and in the pre‑eminent surviving hilltop enclosure. They reflect the pinnacle of Hopewell intellectual, technical, and symbolic achievement.

Criterion (iii): Hopewell Ceremonial Earthworks bears exceptional testimony to the unique characteristics of their builders, who lived in small, dispersed, egalitarian groups, between 1 and 400 CE, amongst the river valleys of what is now southern and central Ohio. Their economy was a mix of foraging, fishing, farming, and cultivation, yet they gathered periodically to create, manage, and worship within these massive public works. The precision of their carefully composed earthen architecture, and its timber precursors, reflected an elaborate ceremonialism and linked it with the order and rhythms of the cosmos. The earthworks in this series, together with their archaeological remains, offer the finest extant testimony to the nature, scope, and richness of the Hopewell cultural tradition.

Integrity

All the attributes necessary to convey and sustain the Outstanding Universal Value are in the boundaries of the serial property. These include the earthwork walls, gateways, ditches, ponds, and in situ archaeological remains. The series is of sufficient size to ensure the complete representation of the features and values that convey the significance of the property, through the inclusion of the largest and best-preserved examples of each major geometric form found amongst Hopewell Ceremonial Earthworks, as well as the most important hilltop enclosure. In addition, all the component parts are complete and in good condition, with the ability to convey their large forms and the relationships amongst them. The property does not suffer from adverse effects of development and/or neglect, as each site is managed as a public park in rural or low-density suburban settings. The curated artefacts in site-based collections also support the understanding of the attributes.

Authenticity

Hopewell Ceremonial Earthworks is authentic to an extraordinary extent, given the long time that has elapsed since its construction, in terms of their locations and settings, forms and designs, materials and substance, and spirit and feeling. The locations for all the component parts are unchanged; the settings for the earthworks are still predominantly semirural or are in low-density residential districts buffered for most of their perimeters by parkland. In form and design, the enclosure walls and mounds remain mostly intact. High-resolution remote-sensing data for the Seip Earthworks, Hopewell Mound Group, Hopeton Earthworks, and High Bank Works component parts clearly show intact subsurface portions of wall and building constructions. The predominant materials and substance of the earthworks are likewise authentically preserved in the intact forms of Fort Ancient and the component parts at the Newark Earthworks complex, and in the in situ archaeological remains at all the other sites.

Protection and management requirements

All the component parts are protected as national or State parks. Rigorous federal, state, and local protective measures are also in place to ensure the continued conservation and protection of the property. The buffer zones provide additional protection around the component parts.

Detailed management plans are in place for all eight component parts, following the established policies and legal requirements of their respective governmental owner agencies, the Ohio History Connection and the United States National Park Service, whose local representatives work closely together to provide consistent and coordinated management for the series. All features and elements within the boundaries of the property are closely monitored on a regular basis by professional expert staff from the two owner agencies. Regular maintenance and periodic conservation programmes ensure that the sites, features, and resources will be sustained in a superior state of conservation in the future.

Links
Hopewell Ceremonial Earthworks

United States of America
Date of Inscription: 2023
Criteria: (i)(iii)
Property : 320.7 ha

Buffer zone: 561.8 ha
Dossier: 1689
Serial: yes

Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026