World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Ciudad Universitaria de Caracas
Ciudad Universitaria de Caracas
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Ciudad Universitaria de Caracas

The Ciudad Universitaria de Caracas, built to the design of the architect Carlos Raúl Villanueva, between 1940 and 1960, is an outstanding example of the Modern Movement in architecture. The university campus integrates the large number of buildings and functions into a clearly articulated ensemble, including masterpieces of modern architecture and visual arts, such as the Aula Magna with the "Clouds" of Alexander Calder, the Olympic Stadium, and the Covered Plaza.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief Synthesis

Located in Caracas, capital city of Venezuela, South America, the main campus of the Universidad Central de Venezuela, was established in the colonial period by Simon Bolivar. Covering an area of 164,203 hectares, the site includes masterpieces of architecture and modern art built to the design of architect Carlos Raúl Villanueva, between 1940 and 1960, and includes the Botanical Garden. The University integrates a large number of buildings, art and nature into a clearly articulated ensemble, creating an open and dynamic space, where the art forms become an essential part of the inhabited place. The forms and structures express the spirit and technological development of their time in the use of reinforced concrete. Key architectural structures include the Aula Magna with the ‘Clouds’ of Alexander Calder, the Olympic Stadium, and the Covered Plaza. The complex constitutes a modern interpretation of urban and architectural concepts and traditions, incorporating patios and latticed windows as an appropriate solution for its tropical environment.

 Developed over a period of more than twenty years under the direction of Villanueva, the complex has undergone more recent changes as the University caters for an increased population.

Criterion i: The Ciudad Universitaria de Caracas is a masterpiece of modern city planning, architecture and art, created by the Venezuelan architect Carlos Raúl Villanueva and a group of distinguished avant-garde artists.

Criterion iv: The Ciudad Universitaria de Caracas is an outstanding example of the coherent realization of the urban, architectural, and artistic ideals of the early 20th century. It constitutes an ingenious interpretation of the concepts and spaces of colonial traditions and an example of an open and ventilated solution, appropriate for its tropical environment.

Integrity

Ciudad Universitaria de Caracas continues to retain the unity of projects developed by Carlos Raúl Villanueva. Technical vulnerabilities are related to the behavior and decay of the building materials and structures, especially the concrete structures, which after more than fifty years are presenting challenges for their conservation, as well as structural issues relating to soil conditions. Another problem is the detachment of surface materials such as mosaics on some building facades. In view of the increase of the student population, from 6.000 to 50.000 currently, and anticipated future growth, infrastructure and technological networks must be updated. Changes in use have resulted in expansion or subdivision of spaces, as well as the introduction of technical facilities and equipment, carried out without proper control of their quality and adequacy to the architectural context. A systematic monitoring program has been established for the art works, but the maintenance of these is difficult to finance. The property is also vulnerable to social unrest.

Authenticity 

The general layout and setting of the University campus has been retained, even though there have been minor modifications and changes related to the functional needs of the institution. A complete set of documentation of the original project has been kept by the University and it is planned to make this available to the public. Since its nomination there have been minor changes to existing buildings as well as some new constructions. There are also some problems of maintenance of the buildings that still need to be addressed. As a whole, however, the site can be considered to satisfy the test of authenticity in terms of design, materials, workmanship and setting. All the interventions to the buildings, works of art and landscape have been registered and documented and the preventive, corrective and regular maintenance and updating of basic services (water, sewage and electricity) have not affected the outstanding universal value or the image of the property.

Protection and Management Requirements

The Consejo de Preservacion y Desarrollo de la Universidad Central de Venezuela– COPRED (Venezuelan Central University Preservation and Development Council) is the management decision-making structure, operating since 2001. In 2008 and looking for a reinforcement of the basic daily operational works, the area of maintenance that was part of COPRED became a separate entity. The Botanical Garden has its own management structure. COPRED coordinates these two dependencies. Since its creation, COPRED has developed several studies to provide for an integral protection of the site and at present, the institution is developing a comprehensive management plan due to be presented as part of the periodic report in 2012.

The university campus is an integral part of the modern city of Caracas and relevant regulations from the legal protection are being integrated in the approved Plan of Local Urban Development of the municipality of Libertador. However, there is a need to reinforce the coordination between the different levels at national, regional and local authorities (Instituto del Patrimonio Cultural (Institute of Cultural Heritage), Metropolitan Mayor (Alcaldía Metropolitana), Capital District (Distrito Capital) and Libertador Municipality (Alcaldía Libertador).

No buffer zone was identified at the moment of inscription since the hills to the north and the highways to the north-east and south-east provide protection. However, the growth of the residential/commercial areas to the south and west boundaries require definition of a buffer zone. 

Links
Universidad Central de Venezuela - Facultad de Arquitectura y Urbanismo (spanish only)

Ciudad Universitaria de Caracas (spanish only)

Activities 1
World Heritage Cities Programme
News  1
World Heritage Committee Inscribes 61 New Sites on World Heritage List
30 November 2000
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
Date of Inscription: 2000
Criteria: (i)(iv)
Property : 164.203 ha

Dossier: 986
Municipality of Libertador, Caracas
N10 29 26.628 W66 53 26.448
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026