World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Palau de la Música Catalana and Hospital de ...
Palau de la Música Catalana and Hospital de Sant Pau, Barcelona
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Palau de la Música Catalana and Hospital de Sant Pau, Barcelona

These are two of the finest contributions to Barcelona's architecture by the Catalan art nouveau architect Lluís Domènech i Montaner. The Palau de la Música Catalana is an exuberant steel-framed structure full of light and space, and decorated by many of the leading designers of the day. The Hospital de Sant Pau is equally bold in its design and decoration, while at the same time perfectly adapted to the needs of the sick.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Palau de la Música Catalana and Hospital de Sant Pau are two of the finest contributions to Barcelona’s architecture by the Catalan Modernista architect, Lluís Domènech i Montaner. The Palau de la Música Catalana is an exuberant steel-framed structure full of light and space, decorated by the leading artists of the period. It has uniqueness, authenticity and beauty and is an unparalleled Modernista example of a public concert hall whose symbolic, artistic and historical value is universal. The Hospital de Sant Pau is also daring in terms of design and decoration, although perfectly suited to the needs of patients. Of exceptional interest, it is the most outstanding example of its kind because of its beauty, size and unique design.

The Palau de la Música Catalana was exceptional from the moment of its conception, because of two very important innovative factors: a special concept of space and a very intelligent use of the new technologies developed during the industrial revolution. The reticular steel frame, which made possible extensive open floor spaces with an absence of structural facades, replaced by a glass skin, was an innovative architectural concept of great importance. The whole building was designed as an interactive space, minimising the distinction between exterior and interior by making the best possible use of natural light, a key factor in enjoyment of the interior space. All of this is brought together by the use of traditional arts, with a unique use of decorative motifs, of great authenticity and beauty, in an unprecedented example in the Modernista style (a movement parallel to Art Nouveau) of a concert hall with universal symbolic, artistic and historic values.

The complex of buildings that make up the Hospital de Sant Pau succeeded the Hospital de la Santa Creu, built in the early 15th century. The Hospital de Sant Pau is of great importance as the largest hospital complex in the Modernista style. Here Domènech i Montaner found original, daring solutions to the problems posed by the needs of the contemporary hospital (ventilation, hygiene, specialities, interdisciplinary medicine, etc.). The Hospital de Sant Pau remains true to the original design. It is of exceptional interest because of its beauty, scale and unique architectural design.

These are two of the earliest and finest examples of Modernista architecture, of exceptional importance, both as manifestations of human creative genius and works of art, because they offered new architectural, typological and artistic solutions to facilities for music and medicine.

Criterion (i): The Palau de la Música Catalana and the Hospital de Sant Pau in Barcelona are masterpieces of the imaginative and exuberant Modernista style that flowered in early 20th century Barcelona. They are the work of Lluís Domènech i Montaner, one of the acknowledged leaders of this influential architectural movement.

Criterion (ii): The Palau de la Música Catalana and the Hospital de Sant Pau in Barcelona are outstanding examples of the Catalan Modernista style, movement that played an important role in the evolution of 20th century architecture.

Criterion (iv): The Palau de la Música Catalana and the Hospital de Sant Pau are two of the finest (and earliest) examples of the Modernist style in architecture and of exceptional importance, both as manifestations of human creative genius and works of art.

Integrity

The property includes the whole of both its components. The boundaries of both monuments include all the attributes that express their Outstanding Universal Value.

A major comprehensive restoration programme (structural, interior and facades), as well as a modernisation of the functional requirements (acoustics, thermal insulation, etc.) was carried out on the Palau de la Música Catalana in 1988. The Hospital de Sant Pau has been undergoing continual maintenance since it was built. Our Lady of Mercy pavilion was restored in 1979–1980 and the Clock Tower in 1985–1989. Because of the difficulty of adapting this historic building to modern medical requirements, hospital services were transferred to new buildings on the north of the site, making possible comprehensive restoration of the original buildings.

Because of these works to maintain the integrity of the structures, adverse factors affecting them are largely insignificant and of external origin (air pollution; dust and water (rain/water table)). Appropriate measures are being taken to suppress them, such as vehicle circulation limitation.

Authenticity

Both monuments possess a high degree of authenticity. Great care has been taken to replace damaged elements such as external tiles with exact copies of the originals. In the Palau de la Música Catalana, ingenious methods have been used to install modern technical equipment such as air conditioning, soundproofing, etc., and to reinforce structural elements, as well as in the careful restoration of the facades. It retains its original use as a concert hall. The Hospital de Sant Pau underwent a comprehensive restoration under a phased plan in 2009–2016. It was intended for the restored pavilions to be used for purposes such as research and health, or as offices for various international organizations.

Protection and management requirements

The Palau de la Música Catalana was declared a national monument in 1971 and the Hospital de Sant Pau in 1978. The property has full legal protection through Law 16/1985 of 25 June, concerning Spanish Historical Heritage, Law 9/1993 of 30 September, concerning Catalan Cultural Heritage, and Decree 276/2005, concerning Territorial Commissions for the Cultural Heritage. At the Municipal level the Metropolitan General Plan and the Special Plan to protect the architectural heritage of the city of Barcelona protect the property. Other legislation such as Law 13/2002, concerning Tourism in Catalonia helps protect the property.

Business Management and Administration are carried out by the Territorial Commission for the Cultural Heritage of the City of Barcelona. Authorities such as State, Autonomous community and local level are involved in management, in both cases.

The Palau de la Música is used as a concert hall and also for public visits. It is owned by the Orfeó Català, a private choral association, and is managed by the Palau de la Música Catalana Consortium, with members nominated by the municipal administration, Barcelona City Council, the Government of Catalonia and the Orfeó Català. This body was refounded as Fundació Orfeó Català - Palau de la Música Catalana. It has a special section responsible for heritage and for the restoration work in recent years. There is a strategic management plan and a maintenance plan, which are regularly updated. There is a procedure for the use of the spaces.

The Hospital de Sant Pau was used as a hospital until 2009. Current uses are socio-cultural, international and public visits. The Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau Foundation is the private body responsible for the management. The Board of Trustees is the overall governing body. Its members are drawn equally from the Barcelona City Council, the Cathedral Chapter and the Government of Catalonia. The management of the site is under contractual agreement between the State Party and a third party and under traditional protective measures or customary law. The special urban plan specifies the uses of the buildings and architectural regulation within the enclosure. There are internal rules of procedure.

Links
Ministerio de Educación, Cultura y Deporte (in Spanish)

Sant Pau Recinte Modernista

Palau de la Música Catalana

Activities 1
World Heritage Cities Programme
News  1
World Heritage Committee Inscribes 46 New Sites on World Heritage List
7 December 1997
Media
play_arrow Palau de la Música Catalana and Hospital de Sant Pau, ... (UNESCO/NHK)
Spain
Date of Inscription: 1997
Minor boundary modification inscribed year: 2008
Criteria: (i)(ii)(iv)
Property : 6.87 ha

Buffer zone: 17.94 ha
Dossier: 804bis
Serial: yes

Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026