World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Genoa: Le Strade Nuove and the system of the ...
Genoa: Le Strade Nuove and the system of the Palazzi dei Rolli
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Genoa: Le Strade Nuove and the system of the Palazzi dei Rolli

The Strade Nuove and the system of the Palazzi dei Rolli in Genoa’s historic centre date from the late 16th and early 17th centuries when the Republic of Genoa was at the height of its financial and seafaring power. The site represents the first example in Europe of an urban development project parcelled out by a public authority within a unitary framework and associated to a particular system of ‘public lodging’ in private residences, as decreed by the Senate in 1576. The site includes an ensemble of Renaissance and Baroque palaces along the so-called ‘new streets’ (Strade Nuove). The Palazzi dei Rolli offer an extraordinary variety of different solutions, achieving universal value in adapting to the particular characteristics of the site and to the requirements of a specific social and economic organization. They also offer an original example of a public network of private residences designated to host state visits.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The Strade Nuove and the system of the Palazzi dei Rolli in Genoa’s historic centre date from the late 16th and early 17th centuries when the Republic of Genoa was at the height of its financial and seafaring power. The property represents the first example in Europe of an urban development project parcelled out by a public authority within a unitary framework and associated to a particular system of ‘public lodging’ in private residences, as decreed by the Senate in 1576.

The property includes an ensemble of Renaissance and Baroque palaces along the so-called ‘new streets’ (Strade Nuove). As the city`s wealth increased during the 16th century, the wealthy aristocrats built a new district in the upper part of the city to the north of the narrow streets of tightly packed medieval buildings with streets and palaces laid out in a formal manner. The design of the streets is attributed to architect Galeazzo Alessi who designed several of the palaces as well.

The residences, known as Palazzi dei Rolli, offer an extraordinary variety of different solutions, achieving universal value in adapting to the particular characteristics of the site and to the requirements of a specific social and economic organization. They also offer an original example of a public network of private residences designated to host state visits.

Although the different palaces had distinct designs solutions, particularly in response to the local topography, they shared common characteristics. The palaces were three or four storeys in height with an entrance hall featuring spectacular open staircases, courtyards and loggias overlooking gardens. Interior decorations featured stuccos and frescoes.

Together, the Palazzi dei Rolli cover 15.77 hectares. The buffer zone of 98.73 hectares around the Strade Nuove covers the entire historic centre.

Criterion (ii): The ensemble of the Strade Nuove and the related palaces exhibit an important interchange of values on the development of architecture and town planning in the 16th and 17th centuries. Through the architectural treatises of the time, these examples were publicized making the Strade Nuove and the late-Renaissance palaces of Genoa a significant landmark in the development of Mannerist and Baroque architecture in Europe.

Criterion (iv): The Strade Nuove in Genoa are an outstanding example of an urban ensemble consisting of aristocratic palaces of high architectural value, which illustrate the economy and politics of the mercantile city of Genoa at the height of its power in the 16th and 17th centuries. The project proposed a new and innovative spirit that characterized the Siglo de los Genoveses (1563 to 1640). In 1576, the Republic of Genoa established a legally based list of Rolli recognizing the most outstanding palaces for official lodging of distinguished guests.

Integrity

The boundary encompasses the main ensembles of Renaissance and Baroque palaces along the two main streets of the Strade Nuove. Individual palaces retain their integrity.

This area of Renaissance urban renovation was integrated with the medieval part of the city and has retained its relationship with this context intact. In addition to the Rolli palaces, the property also includes other historic buildings, such as medieval houses as well as more recently constructed buildings. Modern interventions (e.g. the addition to the city’s theatre) are relatively limited and do not disturb the overall character.

As a sea power, the city of Genoa has always been closely associated with its port, which nonetheless was separated from the city for centuries by partitions of different nature such as the walls from the 17th century, the “marble terraces” in the 19th century  and other service facilities. In the post-war period, a motorway was built and elevated on pillars above ground. The connection between the port and the centre has now been partly re-established by removing the railway and storage structures and repaving the area for pedestrian use. The Committee at the time of inscription encouraged consideration of the motorway being put in a tunnel in order to strengthen the connection between the palaces and the sea.

Authenticity

The nominated area encloses the ensemble of the Strade Nuove and part of the medieval fabric. The street pattern of this planned Renaissance urban ensemble above the medieval city has been retained. The area contains the 42 palaces that were on the list of Rolli. These palaces include those that were the most representative and have best preserved their authenticity.

Only one of the palaces was partly damaged during the war and the damaged upper story has since been rebuilt. This palace and other two palaces on Via Garibaldi are used as museums. Many of the Rolli palaces are privately owned and therefore retain their original function as lodging for Genoese families. Others provide office or commercial use. However, the owners have made the necessary adaptations with due respect to the original structures and the historical authenticity of the buildings.

As a result of the initiatives undertaken, particularly from the 1990s, the palaces have been surveyed and their state of conservation has been verified. The façades and the interiors of many have been carefully restored. The palaces are in good state of conservation and their condition is monitored by the state authority.

Protection and management requirements

The property is entirely surrounded by the city’s historic centre, which forms the buffer zone. This historic centre is defined as a conservation area with appropriate regulations in its Urban Master Plan. Also, the city has adopted a Conservation Management Plan for this area.  The Rolli Palaces and other monumental buildings included in the property are all protected by the Legislative Decree 42/2004, Code of Cultural Assets and Landscape. Interventions on the property must be authorized by the relevant Soprintendenza (peripheral office of the Ministry for Cultural Heritage and Activities and Tourism), which may either deny the interventions for conservation reasons or authorise them only partially.

The palaces fall under several different types of ownership. Some are privately owned, some are in public ownership (Municipality of Genoa, State – Ministry of Cultural Heritage and Activities and Tourism), some host the offices of public institutions as well as museums, and others are in mixed ownership. Since 2002, the palaces have been part of the Association of Palazzi dei Rolli, an organization that promotes their enhancement and management.

The management structure of the property is coordinated by the Palazzo Ducale Fondazione per la Cultura, which cooperates with the representatives of all other involved institutions. The management structure is directed by a Steering Committee made up of representatives of the bodies which have signed the Protocol itself (the City Council, the Directorate of Cultural Heritage and Activities of the Liguria Region, the Soprintendenza for Architectural Heritage and the Ligurian Countryside,  the Liguria Region, the Genoa Province, the University of Genoa, the Chamber of Commerce of Genoa  and the Palazzo Ducale Fondazione per la Cultura), with political functions defining strategies, approaches and priorities.

The implementation of the Management Plan is entrusted to a technical structure divided into 3 working parties, which relate to the three sectorial plans: Plan A. Knowledge, protection and conservation; Plan B. Cultural promotion; Plan C. Social and economic enhancement. In terms of development, the historic area that forms the buffer zone is being improved and the medieval building stock is receiving assistance. Alterations to properties are regulated with strict controls and demolition is forbidden under the terms of the Management Plan. Moreover, the Strade Nuove are the focus for tourist development.

Because of its management agility and flexibility, the Palazzo Ducale Fondazione per la Cultura has been identified as the organization most suitable for performing the work of coordination between the parties involved in the management of the property. The Coordinating body is supported by a Scientific Committee which checks the consistency of the sectorial policies with the objective of safeguarding the integrity of the heritage as required by the World Heritage Convention.

The unitary nature of the plan’s structure will give rise to integrated programmes, developing synergies and optimizing the economic investments of the various parties.

Links
Genova: le Strade Nuove and the system of the Palazzi dei Rolli

Activities 1
World Heritage Cities Programme
News  1
Ancient irrigation system (Oman) and Palaces of Genoa (Italy) among ten new sites on World Heritage List
13 July 2006
Media
play_arrow Genoa: Le Strade Nuove and the system of the Palazzi ... (UNESCO/NHK)
Italy
Date of Inscription: 2006
Criteria: (ii)(iv)
Property : 15.77 ha

Buffer zone: 114.5 ha
Dossier: 1211
Liguria Region, Genoa Province
N44 24 43.2 E8 55 48
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026