World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Dougga / Thugga
Dougga / Thugga
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Assistance
Dougga / Thugga

Before the Roman annexation of Numidia, the town of Thugga, built on an elevated site overlooking a fertile plain, was the capital of an important Libyco-Punic state. It flourished under Roman and Byzantine rule, but declined in the Islamic period. The impressive ruins that are visible today give some idea of the resources of a small Roman town on the fringes of the empire.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The archaeological site of Thugga/Dougga is located in the North-west region of Tunisia, perched on the summit of a hill at an altitude of 571 m, dominating the fertile valley of Oued Khalled. Before the Roman annexation of Numidia, Thugga had existed for more than six centuries and was, probably, the first capital of the Numidian kingdom. It flourished under Roman rule but declined during the Byzantine and Islamic periods. The impressive ruins which are visible today give an idea of the resources of a Romanised Numidian town.

The archaeological site covers an area of approximately 75 ha. These ruins of a complete city with all its components are a testimony to more than 17 centuries of history. They are an outstanding example illustrating the synthesis between different cultures: Numidian, Punic, Hellenistic, and Roman. The Roman monuments were integrated within the urban fabric, essentially Numidian. Despite its relative unimportance in the administrative structure of the Roman province of Africa, Dougga possesses a remarkable group of public buildings, dating for the most part from the 2nd and 3rd centuries A.D. Dougga is considered the best preserved example of an Africo-Roman town in North Africa. As such, it is an exceptional illustration of what daily life was like in Antiquity.

Criterion (ii): The site of Dougga is an outstanding example of the birth, development and history of an indigenous city since the second millennium BC. The site of Dougga conserves the complete ruins of an antique city with all its components and provides the best known example of town layout of an indigenous foundation, adapted to town planning on the Roman model.

Criterion (iii): The important epigraphic collection (over 2000 Libyan, Punic, bilingual, Greek and above all Latin inscriptions) has made a decisive contribution to the decipherment of the Libyan language and knowledge of the social and municipal life of the Numidians, testifying to the level of development attained by the city during the 3rd and 2nd centuries BC.

Over approximately two and a half centuries, two legally distinct communities, one comprising an indigenous population and the other a community of settlers who were Roman citizens, coexisted in the same town and on the same territory. They both equally participated in the development and flourishing of the city.

Whilst retaining its largely Numidian urban fabric, Thugga therefore took on the aspect of a Roman monumental city. In this respect, it constitutes a representative example of a Maghreb city under the Numidian kings and during the first centuries of the Roman Empire.

In comparison to similar sites in North Africa, the ruins of the Roman and pre-Roman city of Thugga are surprisingly complete and well preserved. Consequently, they illustrate in an exceptional manner what daily life was like in a small provincial town during the Roman period.

Integrity (2009)

Within its boundaries, the archaeological site of Dougga conserves, in its entirety, the vestiges of the different periods of the Antique city with all its components: the monumental centre (capitol, forum, market, Rose of the winds square, etc.), entertainment buildings (theatre, circus) and public baths, clearly reflecting the way an indigenous foundation evolved during the Roman period

Authenticity (2009)

The state of conservation of these monuments is also exceptional. The level of authenticity of the archaeological remains is very high and has not been affected by restoration activities and conservation interventions over the past century because they have been minimal and were carried out in conformity with the principles of the 1964 Venice Charter. However, there are some exceptions. The authenticity of the Libyco-Punic mausoleum reconstructed between 1908 and 1910 has long remained subject of debate (although it might be argued that this monument has retained its own historicity).

Protection and management requirements (2009)

In addition to the many monuments benefiting from a specific listing as historic monuments, the archaeological site of Dougga is protected by Law 35-1994 of 24 February 1994 concerning the protection of archaeological and historical heritage and traditional arts (Heritage Code), as well as by Law 83-87 of 11 November 1983 concerning the protection of agricultural land, modified and completed by Law 90-45 of 23 April 1990 and by Law 96-104 of 25 November 1996.

A proposal for the boundary of the site of Dougga was submitted to the National Heritage Commission for the creation of the Cultural site of Dougga and its landscape. The study for the development of the Protection and Enhancement Plan (PPMV) for the site, as defined by the Heritage Code, was completed. This legal tool shall enable the control of all interventions undertaken at the site and in the surrounding buffer zone of 200 m. In addition to prohibited activities or those only authorised under certain conditions, it defines the different implementation mechanisms. The PPMV is the management tool that guarantees the preservation of the archaeological site of Dougga and enables the control of all eventual modifications in its immediate environment.

Links
National Heritage Institute's website page

Tunisian National Tourism Office's website page

Timeless Myth's website page on Dougga (Miftah Shamali)

Publications
Ennabli, Abdelmajid. "North Africa's Roman art. Its future" in North Africa's Roman art. Its future , September 2000, pp 18-29
News  1
World Heritage Committee Inscribes 46 New Sites on World Heritage List
7 December 1997
Media
play_arrow Dougga / Thugga (UNESCO/NHK)
Tunisia
Date of Inscription: 1997
Criteria: (ii)(iii)
Property : 75 ha

Buffer zone: 91 ha
Dossier: 794
Gouvernat de Beja
N36 25 24.996 E9 13 13.008
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026