World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Beijing Central Axis: A Building Ensemble ...
Beijing Central Axis: A Building Ensemble Exhibiting the Ideal Order of the Chinese Capital
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Beijing Central Axis: A Building Ensemble Exhibiting the Ideal Order of the Chinese Capital

Running north to south through the heart of historical Beijing, the Central Axis consists of former imperial palaces and gardens, sacrificial structures, and ceremonial and public buildings. Together they bear testimony to the evolution of the city and exhibits evidence of the imperial dynastic system and urban planning traditions of China. The location, layout, urban pattern, roads and design showcase the ideal capital city as prescribed in the Kaogongji, an ancient text known as the Book of Diverse Crafts. The area, between two parallel rivers, has been settled for about 3,000 years, but the Central Axis itself originated during the Yuan Dynasty (1271-1368) that established its capital, Dadu, in the northern part. The property also features later historical structures built during the Ming Dynasty (1368-1644) and improved during the Qing Dynasty (1636-1912).

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

Beijing Central Axis runs from north to south through the heart of historical Beijing. It is defined by former imperial palaces and gardens, imperial sacrificial buildings, ancient city management facilities, ceremonial and public buildings and Central Axis roads remains. The Axis bears testimony to the evolution of the city exhibiting evidence of the imperial dynastic system and urban planning traditions of China. The location, layout, urban pattern and design of the Axis showcase the ideal capital city paradigm prescribed in the Kaogongji, an ancient text known as the Book of Diverse Crafts. The Central Axis originated in the Yuan Dynasty (1271-1368) that established Dadu, its capital, in what corresponds to the northern section of the Axis. The property also features later historical structures built during the Ming Dynasty (1368-1644) and improved during the Qing Dynasty (1636-1912).

Criterion (iii): Beijing Central Axis contributes significantly to the global history of urban planning, with its specific characteristics reflecting a cultural and political system developed in China during the imperial dynastic period. This urban planning tradition influenced the planning of other East and Southeast Asian capitals. The principles of planning used for the design of the urban layout which include the definition of the north-south axis and the establishment of a “centre” depict Confucian ideas expressed in the Kaogongji, or Book of Diverse Crafts, which intend to provide neutrality and harmony to the society by means of symmetry and balance in the urban layout. The ritual dimension of this urban planning approach also required placing temples in balance with the Axis and connections to the agricultural ritual calendar performed with seasonal festivities. This balance and symmetry as well as the specific elements of the temples and the centre are still visible and well conserved in the property. This urban planning tradition lasted until the end of the imperial dynastic system, and since then, has been influential but transformed with modern practices. Nevertheless, festivities connected to the ancient agricultural calendar are still performed, including rituals in some of the temples composing the Axis.

Criterion (iv): Beijing Central Axis is an exceptionally well-preserved example of an urban ensemble developed based on an ancient urban planning theory, founded in Confucian principles related to a ritual dimension with city planning, politics, and governance. The principles of the Kaogongji have persisted in the Axis during the imperial dynastic period against the growth and urbanisation of Beijing, providing an illustration of a distinct urban pattern which represents a particular typology in the urban history of the world originated and developed during the imperial dynastic system in China.

Integrity

The integrity of Beijing Central Axis is based on the completeness of the Central Axis as an urban ensemble which carries development over the imperial dynastic system. All the attributes necessary to convey the Outstanding Universal Value are found within the boundaries of the property. The buffer zone provides an added layer of protection helping to contain urban pressures which Beijing Central Axis is vulnerable to. Planning instruments have been developed to address these vulnerabilities as well as increasing tourism pressures, such as the Regulations on the Conservation of Beijing Historical and Cultural City (2021) and the Conservation and Management Plan for Beijing Central Axis (2022-2035).

Authenticity

The authenticity of the property is based on the continuity of the Central Axis as a core of the capital city. The location, natural setting and to some extent, the historical urban setting have been preserved, particularly its layout. The layout of the Axis, as well as some of its attributes, such as the Forbidden City, the Drum and Bell Towers, Jingshan Hill, the Temple of Heaven and other imperial sacrificial and ceremonial buildings have been preserved as they were developed during the Ming and Qing Dynasties. While some elements within the boundaries of the property, such as historical structures, have undergone demolition, reconstruction and remodelling, and areas of the property have undergone and continue to be under rehabilitation and renovation works, the form and design, urban and architectural characteristics of the imperial palaces and gardens, and most of the city management facilities have been maintained. Traditional techniques related to the construction and maintenance of these historical buildings have been maintained, as well as some ritual traditions and knowledge connected to it, including music and festivals. The function of the historical buildings however has changed and has been converted to public uses. The functions of the Axis as a whole has been preserved, as the core of the capital city.

Protection and management requirements

Beijing Central Axis attributes are strictly protected by national and local legislation. In particular, the Regulations on the Conservation of Beijing Central Axis Cultural Heritage and the Conservation and Management Plan for Beijing Central Axis (2022-2035) have been enacted based on the consent of rightsholders and stakeholders, and tailored to the protection of the property and the buffer zone. Multi-level urban plans from the municipal level to the block level have been published and implemented.

Nineteen institutions are involved in the management system. An Advisory and Coordinating Mechanism has been established having Beijing Municipal Leading Group for Building the National Cultural Center as the main manager and coordinating entity. The Beijing Municipal Cultural Heritage Bureau oversees the integrated protection of the property considering all aspects of the planning framework. The National Cultural Heritage Administration provides technical guidance to the Beijing Municipal Cultural Heritage Bureau which functions under the People’s Government of Beijing Municipality. Each heritage element is under the authority of a site management agency. The Beijing Central Axis Conservation Center has been created to coordinate the implementation of the Conservation and Management Plan for Beijing Central Axis (2022-2035) with all other eighteen institutions involved.

News  1
UNESCO World Heritage: 24 new sites inscribed
1 August 2024
China
Date of Inscription: 2024
Criteria: (iii)(iv)
Property : 589 ha

Buffer zone: 4,542 ha
Dossier: 1714
N39 54 26 E116 23 29
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026