World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Pilgrimage Church of Wies
Pilgrimage Church of Wies
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Pilgrimage Church of Wies

Miraculously preserved in the beautiful setting of an Alpine valley, the Church of Wies (1745–54), the work of architect Dominikus Zimmermann, is a masterpiece of Bavarian Rococo – exuberant, colourful and joyful.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The sanctuary of Wies, near Steingaden in Bavaria, is a pilgrimage church extraordinarily well-preserved in the beautiful setting of an Alpine valley, and is a perfect masterpiece of Rococo art and creative genius, as well as an exceptional testimony to a civilization that has disappeared.

The hamlet of Wies, in 1738, is said to have been the setting of a miracle in which tears were seen on a simple wooden figure of Christ mounted on a column that was no longer venerated by the Premonstratensian monks of the Abbey. A wooden chapel constructed in the fields housed the miraculous statue for some time. However, pilgrims from Germany, Austria, Bohemia, and even Italy became so numerous that the Abbot of the Premonstratensians of Steingaden decided to construct a splendid sanctuary. Consequently, work began in 1745 under the direction of the celebrated architect, Dominikus Zimmermann, who was to construct, in this pastoral setting in the foothills of the Alps, one of the most polished creations of Bavarian Rococo. The choir was consecrated in 1749, and the remainder of the church finished by 1754. That year, Dominikus Zimmermann left the city of Landsberg to settle in Wies near his masterpiece, in a new house where he died in 1766.

The church, which is oval in plan, is preceded to the west by a semi-circular narthex. Inside, twin columns placed in front of the walls support the capriciously cut-out cornice and the wooden vaulting with its flattened profile; this defines a second interior volume where the light from the windows and the oculi is cleverly diffused both directly and indirectly. To the east, a long deep choir is surrounded by an upper and a lower gallery.

A unique feature is the harmony between art and the countryside. All art forms and techniques used - architecture, sculpture, painting, stucco work, carving, ironwork, etc. - were melded by the architect into a perfect, unified whole, in order to create a diaphanous spatial structure of light and form. The remarkable stucco decoration is the work of Dominikus Zimmermann, assisted by his brother Johann Baptist -  who was the painter of the Elector of Bavaria, Max-Emmanuel, from 1720. The lively colours of the paintings bring out the sculpted detail and, in the upper areas, the frescoes and stuccowork interpenetrate to produce a light and living decor of unprecedented richness and refinement. The abundance of motifs and figures, the fluidity of the lines, the skilful opening of surfaces, and the 'lights' continually offer the observer fresh surprises. The ceilings painted in trompe-l'œil appear to open to an iridescent sky, across which, angels fly, contributing to the overall lightness of the church as a whole. 

Criterion (i): The sanctuary of Wies, a pilgrimage church constructed in the open countryside, is a perfect masterpiece of Rococo art.

Criterion (iii): The Pilgrimage Church of Wies is an exceptional testimony of cultural and religious traditions. 

Integrity

In this sparsely settled area, in complete solitude, it was possible for a religious and architectural idea to be realized unhindered. The site, therefore, contains all elements necessary for Outstanding Universal Value. There are no immediate, adverse effects of development and/or neglect. 

Authenticity

The setting is completely untouched. Form and design, material and substance, use and function of the Pilgrimage Church of Wies have remained unchanged. 

Protection and management requirements

A core and a buffer zone have been identified to ensure the lasting protection and sustained preservation of the visual and built integrity of the Pilgrimage Church of Wies and its immediate surroundings.

The laws and regulations of the Federal Republic of Germany and the Free State of Bavaria guarantee the consistent protection of the Pilgrimage Church of Wies and its surroundings. The listed monument, which is situated outside the town in a protected landscape close to a nature reserve, is protected by a number of legal instruments (monument protection law, nature protection law, building and planning law). Furthermore, the regional development programme of the Free State of Bavaria contains a special clause according to which UNESCO World Heritage properties are to be protected and maintained in good condition.

The Free State of Bavaria is owner of the Pilgrimage Church of Wies. The property is managed under the responsibility of the Pilgrimage Church Foundation St Joseph. The State Construction Office Weilheim is responsible for construction issues, and the coordination between the stakeholders is organised by the site manager, who is based in the administrative district office of Weilheim.

The management system consists of a set of maintenance and conservation measures to ensure the protection of the property and the surrounding cultural landscape by sustainable agriculture. More information on visitor management is provided in the Management Plan and through the Periodic Reporting mechanism.

Links
Tourist office (in German only)

Die Wieskirche (Deutsche UNESCO-Kommission)

Wieskirche - Wallfahrtskirche zum Gegeißelten Heiland auf der Wies (in English only)

Media
play_arrow Pilgrimage Church of Wies (UNESCO/NHK)
play_arrow Pilgrimage Church of Wies (UNESCO/NHK)
Germany
Date of Inscription: 1983
Minor boundary modification inscribed year: 2011
Criteria: (i)(iii)
Property : 0.1 ha

Buffer zone: 8.4 ha
Dossier: 271bis
Town of Steingaden, District of Weilheim-Schongau, Region of Upper Bavaria, State of Bavaria (Bayern)
N47 40 52.6 E10 54 0.5
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026