World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Morne Trois Pitons National Park
Morne Trois Pitons National Park
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
Assistance
Morne Trois Pitons National Park

Luxuriant natural tropical forest blends with scenic volcanic features of great scientific interest in this national park centred on the 1,342-m-high volcano known as Morne Trois Pitons. With its precipitous slopes and deeply incised valleys, 50 fumaroles, hot springs, three freshwater lakes, a 'boiling lake' and five volcanoes, located on the park's nearly 7,000 ha, together with the richest biodiversity in the Lesser Antilles, Morne Trois Pitons National Park presents a rare combination of natural features of World Heritage value.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief Synthesis

A rugged mountain range featuring steep volcanoes and deep canyons forms the natural spine of Dominica, a volcanic island of the Lesser Antilles. Morne Trois Pitons National Park (MTPNP) protects a scenically striking part in the central and southern highlands with an extension of 6,857 hectares, roughly 9 percent of the country’s land area. The centerpiece is Morne Trois Pitons, one of five live volcanic centers within the park. Above 1,300 m.a.s.l., this spectacular dome complex is the highest peak within the property. The park’s landscape is dominated by the extreme relief covered by various types of tropical forest against the dramatic backdrop of diverse volcanic topography and features. The scenic beauty is further complemented by numerous natural lakes and pools, including Boeri Lake and Freshwater Lake, the country’s largest lakes. Countless rivers and creeks originate in MTPNP, often forming magnificent waterfalls on their way towards the ocean.

Within MTPNP there are massive volcanic piles surrounded by precipitous glacis slopes and soufrieres, in particular the Grand Soufriere or Valley of Desolation. In this large amphitheater-like area surrounded by mountains, the volcanic activity is displayed in the form of streams of various colors interspersed with fumaroles and hot springs, bubbling mud ponds and the aptly named Boiling Lake. The latter is a massive hot spring with a water temperature of about 95°C. Surrounded by steep cliffs, the lake is one of the largest of its kind in the world. It constantly bubbles and churns, with steam emitting an almost surreal sound. Water level and coloration vary greatly.

The barren vegetation in the Valley of Desolation contrasts sharply with the lush vegetation dominating the landscape elsewhere. The rugged and abrupt relief results in a highly varied mosaic of vegetation and habitats. At least five forest types can be distinguished, including rare Elfin or cloud forest at the highest elevations. Overall, the forests are in a remarkably good conservation state within a region that has otherwise lost most of its historic forest cover. MTPNP is known for its rich, partially endemic flora and remarkable fauna. The property boasts major freshwater resources, including the headwaters of the streams and rivers in the southern half of the island.

Criterion (viii): The property encompasses extraordinary and intact examples and arrays of geomorphologic features as a result of a series of volcanic eruptions. The distinctive geology and landforms of Morne Trois Pitons National Park are comprised of three major types of geological formations: volcanic piles, glacis slopes and soufrieres. The property displays a magnificent spectrum of volcanic activity in the form of streams of various colors interspersed with fumaroles, mud ponds and hot springs, including the massive Boiling Lake. Ongoing geo-morphological processes of reduction are taking place in a largely undisturbed setting of stunning scenic value and major scientific interest.

Criterion (x): Morne Trois Pitons National Park is home to one of the very rare largely intact forest areas remaining in the Insular Caribbean, a region recognized through various priority-setting exercises as a highly threatened biodiversity region and center of endemism of global importance. Along extreme altitudinal and micro-climatic gradients an impressive variety of forest types has evolved featuring a highly diverse flora with many endemic vascular plant species. There are also endemic reptiles and amphibians and a noteworthy number of bird species, including the Imperial Parrot and the vulnerable Red-Necked Parrot, which are endemic to Dominica. Much of the biological wealth remains to be documented and research is likely to reveal further biodiversity secrets.

Integrity

While the property is not very large in absolute terms, it covers a significant area of the relatively small island of Dominica. The boundaries adequately cover the geological and volcanic features and phenomena, and include representative areas of the various tropical forest types. The forests harbor a microcosm of Dominica’s biological diversity and species endemism, and provide intact and protected habitat for a wide diversity of flora and fauna, including a range of endemic species across several taxonomic groups.

Most of the property is in a good state of conservation. There is a high degree of natural protection as a function of the harsh terrain and the lack of road infrastructure in most of the property. While historic land and resource use is poorly documented, there are no human settlements within MTPNP’s boundaries today and there are no major population centers in the immediate vicinity. Minor impacts have included a small quarry, agricultural encroachment in the south of the property and the legally permitted water and power rights granted to Dominica’s Electric Utility Company which have so far been used in a responsible way.

As long as the legal requirements are maintained and de facto enforced, the park’s essential attributes and natural heritage values are not under any immediate threat.

Protection and management requirements

Some historic accounts suggest that the conservation of Dominica’s interior forests may be in part related to the original inhabitants’ fierce resistance to settlements. The formal conservation history of Morne Trois Pitons National Park dates back to the 1950s when the area was first proposed as a forest reserve. MTPNP was designated in 1975 as the country’s first national park under the provisions of the National Parks and Protected Areas Act. The responsibility for the protection and management rests with the Division of Forestry, Wildlife and National Parks of the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries. Day to day responsibilities for the MTPNP resides in the National Parks Unit of the Division, headquartered in the nearby capital of Roseau. The development and management of the Morne Trois Pitons National Park is guided by management plans covering periods of several years.

While the property is in a good state of conservation, it is not immune from the many threats and challenges well known in Caribbean island settings. There are a number of invasive alien species, such as opossum and agouti, as well as feral cats, pigs and rats. The impacts are poorly monitored and understood. Consequently, a better understanding is needed. More decisively, MTPNP’s importance for hydropower, geothermal energy and drinking water is reflected in conservation legislation. Corresponding rights have been granted to the governmental electric power provider. Possible further energy development and transmission, as well as use of geothermal energy, are permitted and require a careful balancing between conservation requirements and competing societal demands.

Dominica is susceptible to heavy tropical storms. Major hurricane events occurred for example in 1979 and 1980 resulting in major damage to the forests. Another issue is tourism, which remains localized due to the poor infrastructure. A cable car construction project through the centre of the property was not approved, yet serves as a reminder of the delicate balance between benefits and risks associated with tourism development in protected areas.

In terms of both species conservation and awareness-raising, the Imperial Parrot or Sisserou, the island's national bird featured on the national flag, is of high symbolical value. Some of its key habitat is known to be outside of the park suggesting room for further optimization of the boundaries.

From the very beginning MTPNP has been suffering from funding and staffing shortages and a heavy reliance on external support. Future management will have to ensure that the above described threats can be responded to through the allocation of adequate funding and the consolidation of capacities.

Links
 View photos from OUR PLACE the World Heritage collection

The Morne Trois Pitons National Park (Commonwealth of Dominica)

Morne Trois Pitons National Park (VisitDominica.com)

Morne Trois Pitons World Heritage Site (Virtual Dominica)

Protectedplanet.net

Activities 1
World Heritage Programme for Small Island Developing States (SIDS)
News  1
World Heritage Committee Inscribes 46 New Sites on World Heritage List
7 December 1997
Media
play_arrow Morne Trois Pitons National Park (UNESCO/NHK)
Dominica
Date of Inscription: 1997
Criteria: (viii)(x)
Property : 6,857 ha

Dossier: 814
South central part of the island
N15 19 52.007 W61 18 23.796
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2017 2016 2015 2001 1999 1998
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026