World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Island of Mozambique
Island of Mozambique
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Assistance
Island of Mozambique

The fortified city of Mozambique is located on this island, a former Portuguese trading-post on the route to India. Its remarkable architectural unity is due to the consistent use, since the 16th century, of the same building techniques, building materials (stone or macuti) and decorative principles.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief Synthesis

The Island of Mozambique is a calcareous coral reef situated 4 km from the mainland coast in the entrance to the Mossuril Bay of the Indian Ocean in Nampula Province of the Republic of Mozambique. A bridge built in the 1960s joins the island to the mainland. The island forms an archipelago with two small uninhabited islands, the Islands of Goa and Sena to the east.

The island communities are intimately associated with the history of navigation in the Indian Ocean as the island played a unique role in intercontinental trading links from the 10th century. Its international historic importance relates to the development and establishment of Portuguese maritime routes between Western Europe and the Indian subcontinent.

The Island of Mozambique has two different types of dwellings and urban systems. The stone and lime town of Swahili, Arab and European influences in the north half, and the macuti town (city of roofed palm leaves) of traditional African architecture in the south. The stone and lime town, with its administrative and commercial properties, was the first seat of the Portuguese colonial government that lasted from 1507 to 1898. Thereafter the capital was transferred to Lourenço Marques now Maputo.The urban fabric and fortifications of Mozambique Island are exceptional examples of architecture and building techniques resulting from cultural diversity, and the interaction of people of Bantu, Swahili, Arab, Persian, Indian and European origin.

The incredible architectural unity of the island derives from the uninterrupted use of the same building techniques with the same materials and the same decorative principles. The island’s patrimony also includes its oldest extant fortress (St. Sebastian, 1558-1620), other defensive buildings and numerous religious buildings (including many from the 16th century).

Criterion (iv): The town and the fortifications on the Island of Mozambique are an outstanding example of an architecture in which local traditions, Portuguese influences and, to a somewhat lesser extent, Indian and Arab influences are all interwoven.

Criterion (vi): The Island of Mozambique bears important witness to the establishment and development of the Portuguese maritime routes between Western Europe and the Indian sub-continent and thence all of Asia.

Integrity

The boundaries encompass the whole of the Island of Mozambique. The other two islands of the archipelago are in the buffer zone. The boundary includes all the key attributes of outstanding universal value. However the setting of the island is vulnerable and the buffer zone needs to be extended.

The important architectural attributes and masonry building techniques of the unused fortress, and the defensive, religious and administrative buildings remain in the stone and lime town although all require restoration. Many historic buildings are in a state of advanced decay with some in ruins.

In macuti town an enormous population influx that occurred during the 16 years war (1976-1992), has led to overcrowding and poverty, water supply and sanitation problems, erosion and the serious decay of buildings, the technical infrastructure and built environment. In the macuti town the scarcity and elevated costs of building materials have not been conducive to carrying out maintenance or improvements.

The state of conservation of the architectural heritage was not fully satisfactory at the time of the ICOMOS evaluation. In 2011 the conditions were even worse due to extreme population pressures. The integrity of the main island is highly vulnerable.

The island is also in the path of cyclones and much remedial work to the damaged buildings has been required as a result of the devastating 1994 storm.

Authenticity

The existing houses and structures on the island provide evidence that the building materials and techniques are original. The majority of buildings that had administrative, commercial and military functions are still in the same general form and design of their period of construction but the conservation of a living monument, inter-twined with difficult socio-economic problems and changing demands on the urban fabric, requires a particularly sensitive approach.

Building upon and enhancing the remaining authentic nature of the property, a comprehensive study entitled ‘An Agenda for Sustainable Human Development and Integral Conservation”, with relevant recommendations that fully recognised the islands’ remaining authenticity, was prepared following a detailed mission in 1996.

However, the traditional residences have changed in form and design in consequence of the different influences and evolving social and economic circumstances affecting the island. If the present development trends are not reversed, and its transformation through the use of modern building materials continues, there is a real possibility that the authenticity of the macuti town could be compromised. The overall authenticity of the property is highly vulnerable.

Protection and Management requirements

Since 1878 local by-laws have restricted changes to the urban environment and, in principle, these are still valid. The list of Classified Historical Monuments drawn up by the former colonial Commission for Monuments and Historic Relics in Mozambique in 1943, and subsequent years, is presently being adjusted according to new criteria under the national Monument policy.

The Law for the Protection of the Mozambican Cultural Patrimony (Law No. 10/88) determines that the entire old town is explicitly classified as a urban ensemble , and that all buildings older than 1920 are classified as national cultural patrimony to be registered in the National Register for Cultural Heritage within the Ministry for Culture. Under that Law it is also defined duty of any holder of classified cultural patrimony to secure and maintain the property.

Since independence in 1975, the Mozambican Constitution stipulated building ownership whereby the conditions of use and profit are governed by the State. In 1976 all buildings for rent were nationalised and the Administração do Parque Imobiliário do Estado (APIE) (“State Housing Stock Administration”) was established as being responsible for rent collection - of which 30% was intended to cover the APIE administration and building maintenance. However, this measure did not result given the overall challenges to be faced.

In 1975 the National Service of Museums and Antiquities was organised and, in 1977, a Brigade for the Conservation and Restoration of Ilha de Moçambique was established, followed by an Office for the Conservation and Restoration of Monuments in 1980. A cooperation programme began with Nordic countries in 1983 but this only lasted two years, due to the insecurity created by war situation.

The Law for the Protection of the Cultural heritage of Mozambique was passed in 1988 and declared automatically the whole island, as a national cultural heritage. The Ministry of Culture was formally identified as being responsible for the protection of the cultural heritage through the National Directorate for Cultural Heritage but this unit was abolished by 1996. However, the two Departments of Museums and Monuments continued to coordinate activities in the island.

In consequence of the detailed 1996 mission report findings in the "Programme for Sustainable Human Development and Integral Conservation", a jointly funded two-year international programme initiated a number of micro-projects in water and sanitation, tourism development, and heritage restoration.

Subsequent reporting missions in 2000, 2003, 2005, 2006, 2007, and especially that of 2010, revealed some positive progress had been made, including the setting up of a new Ministry for Culture with the re-establishment of the National Directorate for Cultural Heritage, and the tightening up of development controls. Echoing the other findings, the 2010 mission observed that much still remained to be done, particularly with regard to coordinating conservation works and training; halting the collapse of buildings; addressing the water supply and sewage disposal problems; the implementation of an emergency action plan; the provision of a responsible authority; the delineation of a buffer zone; and progress against previous mission findings.

In addition, in 2006 the Government approved a Special status for the island and created a Conservation Office that is now established, but in need of more specialized staff.

A management plan for the World Heritage property was finalized and approved by the Government of Mozambique in 2010, with support from different international partners, including UNESCO, African World Heritage Fund, and the Africa 2009 Programme. The plan will ensure the protection of both tangible and intangible aspects of the property and its buffer zone, through the formal recognition of traditional protection systems that have been in existence for decades, and other measures. A Technical Commission was also established for the island. A cooperation Programme with the World Heritage Centre is looking at how the management system might benefit from ideas within the Urban

Historical Landscape initiative and is also helping to delineate a buffer zone which needs to be submitted to the World Heritage Committee for approval.

The property is at a critical stage and there is a need to bring in multi-disciplinary expertise to assist in supporting a major initiative to foster sustainable development in the light of massive problems of over-crowding and threats to the built fabric and urban spaces (Declaração submetida ao ICOMOS).

Links
Official website page

 View photos from OUR PLACE the World Heritage collection

Movie: Fortress Rehabilitation, Island of Mozambique

Activities 6
World Heritage Earthen Architecture Programme (WHEAP)
World Heritage Cities Programme
Mozambique : Rehabilitation Project of the San Sebastian Fortress, Island of Mozambique
Rehabilitation of the Saint Sebastian Fortress, Island of Mozambique
More add
News  6
Six Heritage Cities from Asia, Pacific and Africa Gather in Penang to Exchange Knowledge about Strengthening Resilience Against Disaster Risks
20 June 2019
Call for Applications: 3rd African World Heritage Regional Youth Forum 2018
26 March 2018
Report on the Historic Urban Landscape Workshops and Field Activities on the Swahili coast in East Africa 2011-2012
18 August 2013
Joint efforts for the preservation of World Heritage in Mozambique
13 February 2009
More add
Mozambique
Date of Inscription: 1991
Criteria: (iv)(vi)
Property : 95.7 ha

Buffer zone: 6,026.02 ha
Dossier: 599
Serial: yes

Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2025 2023 2021 2018 2016 2014 2012 2010 2009 2008 2007 2006 2000 1999 1998 1997 1995 1994 1993
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026