World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
The Loire Valley between Sully-sur-Loire and ...
The Loire Valley between Sully-sur-Loire and Chalonnes
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
The Loire Valley between Sully-sur-Loire and Chalonnes

The Loire Valley is an outstanding cultural landscape of great beauty, containing historic towns and villages, great architectural monuments (the châteaux), and cultivated lands formed by many centuries of interaction between their population and the physical environment, primarily the river Loire itself.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief description

The property of the Loire Valley between Sully-sur-Loire and Chalonnes is located in the regions of the Centre-Val-de-Loire and Pays-de-la-Loire. This cultural landscape covers a section of the Middle course of the 280km river, from Sully-sur-Loire, east of Orléans up to Chalonnes, west of Angers, including the minor and major beds of the river.

It is formed by many centuries of interaction between the river, the land that it irrigates and the populations established there throughout history.

The Loire has been a major communication and commercial axis since Gallo-Roman times up until the 19th century, thus encouraging the economic development of the valley and its towns. Witness to the many works destined to channel the river for navigation and the protection of humankind and the land against flooding, are the ports or dyke systems, sometimes in stonework, that punctuate the river.

The Loire has formed as much the rural landscapes, in the organization of the land and the types of culture (market gardening, vines), as the urban landscapes. Human settlements, isolated farms, villages and towns, translate both the physical characteristics of the different parts of the river and their historical evolution. The tufa and slate architecture, the troglodyte dwellings, the urban fabric, all reflect this. In the boundary of the property, the banks of the Loire are punctuated by villages and towns among which are Sully, Orléans, Blois, Amboise, Tours and Saumur.

The political and social history of France and Western Europe in the Middle Ages as well as during the Renaissance, the period when the Loire Valley was a seat of royal power, is illustrated by the buildings and castles that have made it famous, such as Chambord, Chenonceau, Amboise, Blois and Azay-le-Rideau. Benedictine abbeys first of all, then medieval fortresses, they were transformed during the Renaissance into country houses for recreation and pleasure, with gardens and vistas open to the countryside. The Loire Valley also contains a series of large, important Romanesque churches, witness to the expression of faith of the sovereigns and the people: Saint-Benoît-sur-Loire, Fontevraud, Cunault, the ogival churches of Blois and Candes.

In the 15th and 16th centuries, the Loire Valley constituted a major cultural area for encounters and influences between the Italian Mediterranean, France and Flanders, and participated in the development of garden art and the emergence of interest in the landscape.

Criterion (i): The Loire Valley is noteworthy for the quality of its architectural heritage, in its historic towns such as Blois, Chinon, Orléans, Saumur and Tours, but in particular in its world-famous castles, such as the Château de Chambord.

Criterion (ii): The Loire Valley is an outstanding cultural landscape along a major river. It bears witness to an interchange of human values and to a harmonious development of interactions between humankind and their environment over two millennia.

Criterion (iv): The landscape of the Loire Valley, and more particularly its many cultural monuments, illustrate to an exceptional degree the ideals of the Renaissance and the Age of Enlightenment on western European thought and design.

Integrity

The historical trajectory of the Loire Valley is clearly visible in the current landscape. The variety of architectural, urban and landscape typologies of the property is fully and widely represented over 280 kilometres.

Authenticity

The Loire Valley conserves a high degree of authenticity of the ensemble, and notably the principal urban centres and monuments through their uses and materials, thanks to numerous conservation works. However, several factors risk affecting the property: agricultural mutations, urban spread, installation of activity zones surrounding towns and traffic axes, major construction projects (bridges, motorways).

Protection and management requirements

The ownership regime of this extensive property is very diverse, including numerous public and private ownerships. The river and its banks belong in the public river domain directly managed by the State. The protection of the property is based on the complementarity of several regulations according to the heritage, environment and urbanism codes, notably: Historic Monuments and their surroundings, Remarkable Patrimonial Sites, listed or inscribed sites, natural reserves.

Several hundreds of buildings, public and private, large castles or more modest monuments are protected under the Heritage Code (Historic Monuments), some since the 19th century, and a certain number are undergoing restoration and receive regular maintenance. Several dozen urban centres are protected under the Remarkable Patrimonial Sites, which has enabled the launching of major rehabilitation programmes. Finally, several dozens of sites are listed for application of the Environment Code to enable the preservation of large areas of the landscape. The works linked to the river are regularly maintained or restored. Biodiversity protection preserves the bed of the river.

On this very vast territory, undergoing dynamic demographic and economic change, coordination of the management of the property is ensured by the State, that has appointed a Prefect Coordinator, and the two regions concerned with specific facilities (a structure and an orientation committee adapted to the property).

The management plan identifies the major risks that threaten the property and includes proposals to reduce them. The implementation of additional regulatory protective measures, the awareness raising and training of local collectivities and populations to the challenges for the protection of the inscribed property, the surveillance of important equipment projects, are continuously carried out by the public and private stakeholders of the Val de Loire.

Moreover, the management plan is based on a coherent interregional planning and management programme for the Loire Basin, the “Plan Loire grandeur nature” implemented by the State in 1994, and constantly updated with all the concerned actors. Its objectives include the security of populations in the face of flooding, improvement in the management of water resources, the restoration of ecological diversity, and the enhancement of the natural, landscape and cultural heritage of the Loire valleys.
Notes

The "Chateau and Estate of Chambord", which was previously inscribed on the World Heritage List, is part of the "Loire Valley between Sully-sur-Loire and Chalonnes".

Links
Préfecture de la région Centre (in French)

Region Centre (only in French)

Région des Pays de la Loire (only in french)

Le Val de Loire (Mission Val de Loire)

Activities 1
Cultural Landscapes
News  4
Videos: Site managers report on Covid-19
26 October 2020
The Loire Valley: view from the train
15 April 2014
Ten years of decentralised cooperation between the cities of Chinon and Luang Prabang sponsored by UNESCO
22 December 2005
World Heritage Committee Inscribes 61 New Sites on World Heritage List
30 November 2000
Events  3
Seminar on urban planning systems, a regulatory tool for the protection and management of World Heritage sites and cultural landscapes
22 Jan 2014 - 22 Jan 2014
Val de Loire World Heritage (France) information and one-day workshop on Economy, Heritage and Landscape
12 Dec 2013 - 12 Dec 2013
Val de Loire – World Heritage Interpretation, Training for guides
28 Nov 2007 - 30 Nov 2007
Media
play_arrow NHK World Heritage 100 Series
play_arrow The Loire Valley between Sully-sur-Loire and Chalonnes (UNESCO/NHK)
France
Date of Inscription: 2000
Minor boundary modification inscribed year: 2017
Criteria: (i)(ii)(iv)
Property : 86,021 ha

Buffer zone: 213,481 ha
Dossier: 933bis
N47 23 56.004 E0 42 10.008
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
State of Conservation (SOC)

by year

2000
Protections
by other conservation instruments

1 protection / 1 element

2003 Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage (1 element)

Musical art of horn players, an instrumental technique linked to singing, breath control, vibrato, resonance of place and conviviality

Read more about synergies

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026