World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
The Four Lifts on the Canal du Centre and ...
The Four Lifts on the Canal du Centre and their Environs, La Louvière and Le Roeulx (Hainaut)
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Video
Indicators
The Four Lifts on the Canal du Centre and their Environs, La Louvière and Le Roeulx (Hainaut)

The four hydraulic boat-lifts on this short stretch of the historic Canal du Centre are industrial monuments of the highest quality. Together with the canal itself and its associated structures, they constitute a remarkably well-preserved and complete example of a late-19th-century industrial landscape. Of the eight hydraulic boat-lifts built at the end of the 19th and beginning of the 20th century, the only ones in the world which still exist in their original working condition are these four lifts on the Canal du Centre.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
Japanese
Dutch
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The four hydraulic boat-lifts on the short stretch of the historic Canal du Centre are industrial monuments of the highest quality. Together with the Canal itself and its associated structures, they constitute a remarkably well preserved and complete example of a highly technical industrial landscape at the end of the 19th century.

The construction of the Canal du Centre to ensure the liaison between the Meuse and the Escaut basins was part of the opening-up programme of Hainaut, a rich industrial region, notably coal, but with very few natural navigable waterways for coal export. Digging work began in 1884 and the opening to navigation took place in 1917.

At the very beginning of the project, the architects were confronted with a two-fold problem: the large distance in height over a short distance and the small quantity of water available. The most adapted technique to overcome these constraints was that of boat lifts, developed by English engineers using only hydraulic power.

Over a distance of 7 km, a series of 4 boat lifts, unique worldwide, were built, each one covering a change in level of 15 to 16 meters. The stretch is bordered by a series of art works including two fixed bridges and two lift or swing bridges. The property also comprises the ancient lock No.1 of Thieu, today disaffected, as well as three buildings housing the necessary hydraulic machinery for the good functioning of the lifts. Also, there are several two-storey houses to accommodate the work staff.  

In 1911, at the time of the construction of the canal, a tree-planting programme on the banks was initiated. Various types of trees were planted: American elm and white ash, oak, poplar, maple and sycamore, with copses of elder, sometimes mixed with willow, silver birch and false acacia. A variety of  species (black pine, false acacia, maple, hazel, elderberry and popular) were planted around the lifts. Today, the most common species are lime, maple, chestnut and ash.

Of the eight hydraulic boat-lifts constructed at that time and at the beginning of the 20th century, the four lifts of the Canal du Centre are the only ones worldwide remaining in their functioning original state and still in use.

The canal that can accommodate 300 ton boats is currently used for leisure navigation.

Criterion (iii) : The boat-lifts of the Canal du Centre bear exceptional testimony to the remarkable hydraulic engineering developments of 19th-century Europe.

Criterion (iv) : These boat-lifts represent the apogee of engineering technology to the construction of canals.

Integrity

Even although it is now used for leisure navigation, the Canal du Centre has always been in use, ensuring its permanence. The lifts are still hydraulically powered and the art works (swing bridges, lifts etc.) have not been modernized and still function according to the original techniques.

Authenticity

The degree of authenticity is very high in all respects. The lifts have not undergone any modification since they were built, and their operating machinery is in its original form and in perfect working order. Similarly, the other components of this industrial landscape have been preserved and maintained in their original form, with the minimum of modifications resulting from minor technological developments. The brick and stone buildings are well maintained and sympathetically restored where necessary. The same goes for the metal parts: as the riveting technique was not used in Belgium, a foreign society was called upon to ensure identical restoration work following damage caused by a barge.

Protection and management

The Canal du Centre and the lifts were classified by decree of 22 September 1992. A second decree of 1 February 2002 extended the classification to the machinery buildings of Lifts 2 and 3, including equipment, and the adjacent staff housing. The same decree established a protection zone around the Canal. Furthermore, all the classified elements listed on the Exceptional Properties of the Walloon Region, have the highest level of protection foreseen by Walloon legislation. The trees alongside the Canal have been inscribed on the list of remarkable trees and hedges in 1995.

The Canal du Centre and its boat-lifts are public property. They fall under the competence of the Operational Directorate General of the Waterways Department of Walloon with the functioning, maintenance and management being ensured by the staff of this body.

Engineers possess the original plans to guide decisions regarding conservation and management issues. Tourism enhancement is the responsibility of the « Hainaut Waterways » Association depending on the Hainaut Province.

Following the decision of the Walloon Government on 25 August 2011 to provide the Walloon sites inscribed on the World Heritage List with a management plan, a Pilot Committee, Scientific Committee and a Management Committee have been created.

Links
Canal du Centre lifts (in French)

The canals and their treasures

Operational Directorate-General for Mobility and Waterways (in French)

The hydraulic boat lifts of the Canal du Centre

The Historic Canal du Centre

News  1
UNESCO World Heritage Committee Adds 30 Sites to World Heritage List
2 December 1998
Media
play_arrow The Four Lifts on the Canal du Centre and their ... (UNESCO/NHK)
Belgium
Date of Inscription: 1998
Criteria: (iii)(iv)
Property : 67.3436 ha

Buffer zone: 538.8133 ha
Dossier: 856
N50 28 51.996 E4 8 13.992
Powered by Esri
Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator.
Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026