World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
Prehistoric Sites of the Khorramabad Valley
Prehistoric Sites of the Khorramabad Valley
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
Prehistoric Sites of the Khorramabad Valley

The prehistoric sites of the Khorramabad Valley include five caves and one rock shelter within a narrow ecological corridor rich in water, flora, and fauna. Human occupation dates back 63,000 years, with evidence from the Middle to Upper Palaeolithic periods. These sites reveal Mousterian and Baradostian cultures, offering insights into early human evolution and migration from Africa to Eurasia. Artifacts such as decorative objects and advanced stone tools highlight the cognitive and technological development of early humans in the Zagros Mountains. The area remains underexplored, holding significant potential for future archaeological discoveries.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The Prehistoric Sites of the Khorramabad Valley comprise five prehistoric caves and one rock shelter with evidence of human occupation dating back to 63,000 BP. These are the Kaldar, Ghamari, Gilvaran, Yafteh and Kunji caves, as well as the Gar Arjeneh Rock Shelter (component parts 1 to 6). The Khorramabad Valley is located in the Central Zagros Mountain Range, one of the key routes of human dispersal out of Africa. The numerous caves and rock shelters, ample water resources, rich fauna and flora, suitable stone sources for the tool industry, and relatively mild climate have created favourable conditions for human settlement since the Middle Palaeolithic period. 

Archaeological excavations and study of the artefacts excavated on the sites have established the scientific chronology of human development in the valley. The Mousterian layers in Kunji Cave testify to the domination of the Neanderthals in the valley during the Middle Palaeolithic. During the transition between the Middle and Upper Palaeolithic periods, anatomically modern humans arrived in the valley, expanded their settlements and eventually supplanted the Neanderthals, illustrating the earliest transition phase in the Zagros region, which shed light on the debate over human migration routes out of Africa into Eurasia. The pendants and other decorative objects discovered at the sites, the evidence of using ochre pigments, as well as a decorated piece of terracotta mark the emergence of human cognitive behaviour and belief systems. The shell pendants were possibly sourced from the Persian Gulf, indicating the existence of communication and exchange routes between the Khorramabad Valley and the lowlands of the Persian Gulf during the Upper Palaeolithic period. Large numbers and varieties of stone tools discovered at the sites bear witness to the sophisticated stone tool technologies of the Baradostian culture that surpassed contemporaneous developments in the Zagros Mountains.

Criterion (iii): The Prehistoric Sites of the Khorramabad Valley, with the shell pendants sourced from the distant Persian Gulf and ornaments fashioned from deer canine teeth, are an outstanding manifestation of the emergence and evolution of symbolic communication, a crucial aspect of modern human cognitive development. This evidence, alongside sophisticated stone tool technologies, is an exceptional testimony to the Upper Palaeolithic Baradostian culture on a global scale. The caves and shelters bear witness to the domination of the Neanderthals, to the arrival and expansion of the anatomically modern humans who eventually supplanted the Neanderthals in the valley, and provide insight into the migratory route of human dispersal out of Africa.

Integrity

The prehistoric sites collectively illustrate the multifaceted life of the prehistoric communities and their evolution, and, individually, each of the six component parts contributes to the overall Outstanding Universal Value in a substantial, scientific, readily defined and discernible way. Each component part has been well preserved with affecting factors under control, and the buffer zones provide an additional layer of protection. Despite the development of human settlements in the Khorramabad Valley and the gradual urbanisation of the area, the component parts have maintained their spatial relationships with their relatively undisturbed surrounding environment.

Authenticity

The prehistoric sites are authentic in their location, natural forms, and settings. Natural vegetation, seasonal and permanent rivers, water springs and historical paths have been maintained in these spaces. The archaeological resources are largely undisturbed, constituting a vast authentic knowledge reservoir for future research.

Protection and management requirements

All the component parts have been included on the National Monuments List, conforming to the legislation in force, and are governed, together with their buffer zones, by specific regulations inherent to their protected heritage status. The Iranian Ministry of Cultural Heritage, Tourism and Handicrafts (IMCHTH) is responsible for their research, conservation, monitoring, and management. These activities are implemented through the Research Base, which is a decentralised multi-disciplinary centre reporting to the IMCHTH and the management entity of the property. The management plan sets out management objectives and an action plan with short-, medium- and long-term conservation measures to preserve the values and maintain the integrity and authenticity of the property. The legal and management systems in place ensure the long-term preservation of the property and its immediate and wider setting, which is important to sustain and understand the Outstanding Universal Value of the property.

News  1
UNESCO World Heritage: 26 new sites inscribed
17 July 2025
Iran (Islamic Republic of)
Date of Inscription: 2025
Criteria: (iii)
Property : 394.46 ha

Buffer zone: 7,028.28 ha
Dossier: 1744
Serial: yes

Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026