World Heritage Convention
Help preserve sites now!
Explore UNESCO
English
Login
Our expertise
The List
Activities
Partnerships
Publications
search
World Heritage Convention
search
tune Filter
The List
The works of Jože Plečnik in Ljubljana – ...
The works of Jože Plečnik in Ljubljana – Human Centred Urban Design
Description
Maps
Documents
Gallery
Indicators
The works of Jože Plečnik in Ljubljana – Human Centred Urban Design

The works Jože Plečnik carried in Ljubljana between World War I and World War II present an example of a human centred urban design that successively changed the identity of the city following the dissolution of the Austro-Hungarian Empire, when it changed from a provincial city into the symbolic capital of the Slovenian people. The architect Jože Plečnik contributed to this transformation with his personal, profoundly human vision for the city, based on an architectural dialogue with the older city while serving the needs of emerging modern 20th century society. The property consists of a series of public spaces (squares, parks, streets, promenades, bridges) and public institutions (national library, churches, markets, funerary complex) that were sensitively integrated into the pre-existing urban, natural and cultural context and contributed to the city’s new identity. This highly contextual and human-scale urbanistic approach, as well as Plečnik’s distinctive architectural idiom, stand apart from the other predominant modernist principles of his time. It is an exceptional case of creating public spaces, buildings and green areas according to the vision of a single architect within a limited time, the limited space of an existing city, and with relatively limited resources.

Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0

English
French
Arabic
Chinese
Russian
Spanish
add
Outstanding Universal Value

Brief synthesis

The urban design for Ljubljana was conceived by Architect Jože Plečnik (1872–1957) in the period between the two World Wars. Following World War I and the disintegration of the Austro-Hungarian Empire, a desire to create independent nation states triggered various State and town building projects in Central and South-Eastern Europe. In the changed social contexts, the urban planners and architects introduced new urbanistic and architectural approaches under the influence of the Modernist movement. The transformation of Ljubljana from a peripheral town of the former Empire into a national capital emerged during the introduction of these modernist guidelines, although from entirely different architectural starting points.

The urban design of “Plečnik’s Ljubljana” is based on an architectural dialogue between his interventions and the existing older city. Based on the man-made cityscape and its natural features, two urban axes were conceived: the land axis and the water axis. These two axes are connected by transversal axes, which help to form the urbanistic network of the city. The land axis – the Green Promenade starts at the Trnovo Bridge and runs through the Square of the French Revolution, along Vegova Street with the National and University Library, and ends at the Congress Square with Zvezda Park. Running parallel is the water axis – the Promenade along the Embankments and Bridges of the Ljubljanica River – which extends from the Trnovo district to the Sluice Gate. The historical city centre is connected with vital points in both the rural and urban suburbs, and with the broader spatial network of Ljubljana: the Church of St. Michael, the Church of St. Francis of Assisi, Plečnik’s Žale – Garden of All Saints.

The city centre was interpreted anew and developed into a series of public spaces (squares, parks, streets, promenades, bridges) and public institutions (library, churches, markets, funerary complex).

The property is an outstanding example of urban renewal developed in the context of existing buildings and spaces and tailored to suit the inhabitants. Together, Plečnik’s interventions have created a different type of urban space and architecture, which is not limited to a certain specific use, but instead gives rise to a connecting of the different uses and meanings and creates a new identity for the space. The architectural elements, types and spaces of classical architecture are innovatively summarised, transformed and modernised.

Criterion (iv): The interventions designed by the architect Jože Plečnik throughout the city of Ljubljana in the short period between the two World Wars combine to become an outstanding example of human-centred urban renewal for the purpose of nation building after the demise of the Austro-Hungarian Empire. They are based on a harmonic relationship with the context of the space and its natural possibilities. The city is not built anew but improved with small- or large-scale interventions – new architectural ensembles, buildings and urban accents. The relationship with the past is established in various ways, from adapting the urban network and incorporating existing structures through architectural reminiscences and by establishing new cityscapes. The new urban space is not limited to a specific use but has various functions and the whole is thus imbued with new meanings.

Integrity

The urban design in Ljubljana, as a result of the intervention by Jože Plečnik, includes the readily identifiable characteristics of a symbolic capital city created between the two World Wars by the architect. Ljubljana’s urban landscape comprehensively illustrates an upgrade of the existing space with regards to the topography and based on its continuous use and interpretation of historical layers. The topography of the space is expressed through the urban landscape design of the two axes: the land axis and the water axis. The design of both promenades originates and draws from the continuous use of the space, which defines the positions and use of squares, markets, bridges, parks and other public spaces as well as buildings. A series of public spaces endows the city with public amenities, from spiritual spaces (the Churches of St. Michael and St. Francis of Assisi, Plečnik’s Žale – The Garden of All Saints), spaces for relaxation (archaeological park along the Roman Walls, and promenades along the embankments of the Ljubljanica River, Trnovo Quay), to market activities (Plečnik’s Market), socialising (Congress Square, the Three Bridges, the Cobblers’ Bridge), and intellectual and cultural activities (Vegova Street, National and University Library).

A unified protection regime ensures that the currently unbuilt upon areas remain building-free, that the space preserves its traditional use, and provides comprehensive protection from interventions that could potentially endanger the integrity of the serial property.

Authenticity

The serial property has maintained its original urban design and characteristics, in which the preservation and enhancement of the context of the space are reflected. The serial component parts have faithfully preserved their original design in the exterior arrangements, in the interiors as well as on the facades, in the interior furnishings and the masterful attention to detail. The building materials were reinforced in most components in the 1990s, but regardless of the individual repairs or conservation and restoration interventions, which were a consequence of continuous use, material authenticity in general has not been compromised. Larger urbanistic areas have remained unchanged; in some cases, repairs were performed in order to meet the requirements of modern use and ensure the greater safety and structural stability of the property. With few exceptions, the original functions and uses of all components and their features are preserved and the outdoor spaces are accessible to the public. The characteristics of the original urban design have been preserved as well, although partial changes have appeared due to the overgrowth of the original vegetation and in some places the pressure of local traffic, which has been strategically addressed over the course of the previous decade.

Protection and management requirements

Plečnik’s architectural heritage is a monument of national importance and is protected by the Ordinance designating the Ljubljana work of the architect Jože Plečnik as a cultural monument of national importance (Official Gazette RS, Nos. 51/09, 88/14, 19/16, 76/17 and 17/18). The Ordinance represents a single comprehensive protection mechanism for the entire immovable and movable heritage of the serial property.

All of the serial component parts have conservation plans that form the basis for any interventions on the monuments. Works are coordinated by the Institute for the Protection of Cultural Heritage (IPCHS) and supervised by the specially-appointed conservator for Plečnik’s heritage. The management system complements the existing system for the preservation of architect Jože Plečnik’s heritage in Ljubljana from the professional, organisational as well as legal and financial perspectives, and involves owners, managers and public bodies alike. The management of the property operates on two levels. All component parts have their specific management plans and procedures for the implementation and approval of such plans. State of conservation is monitored by the IPCHS, with a special emphasis on the factors likely to affect the property, in particular development pressures and tourism. The coordination of individual owners, managers, public institutions and professional bodies that form the Management Body is ensured by a joint manager that has overall responsibility for the implementation of a joint management plan. The Museum of Architecture and Design of Ljubljana, as an appointed joint manager, cooperates with those institutions at the state and local level that are responsible for protection, monitoring, presentation, education and research, promotion and cultural tourism.

Activities 1
World Heritage Cities Programme
News  1
World Heritage Committee inscribes four cultural and one natural site on UNESCO’s World Heritage List
28 July 2021
Events  1
20th Century World Heritage: Management and Impact Assessment of Architectural Heritage
20 October 2022
Slovenia
Date of Inscription: 2021
Minor boundary modification inscribed year: 2023
Criteria: (iv)
Property : 19.138 ha

Buffer zone: 194.488 ha
Dossier: 1643bis
Serial: yes

Disclaimer

The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties.

The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries.

Committee sessions
Statutory Documents
Committee decisions
48th session (2026)
47th session (2025)
General Assembly
26th GA (2027)
25th GA (2025)
About World Heritage
The Convention
Convention Text
Policy Compendium
Declaration of principles
Operational Guidelines
The Emblem
The States Parties
The Advisory Bodies
The Centre
Employment & Internships
Who's Who
The List
World Heritage List
World Heritage in Danger
New Inscriptions
Criteria for Selection
Tentative Lists
World Heritage List Nominations
Reporting & Monitoring
State of Conservation (SOC)
Periodic Reporting
Questionnaires 2018-2024
Questionnaires 2008-2015
Reactive Monitoring
Africa
Arab States
Asia & Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe and North America
Partnerships
Become a Partner
What Partners Do
Our Partners
Activities
All our activities
Volunteer
Publications
World Heritage Review
Series
Resource Manuals
World Heritage wall map
More publications ...
Funding
World Heritage Fund
International Assistance
More
Contacts
Site Map
Become a member
Donate Now!
UNESCO
UNESCO Latest News
Take Action
Ideas & Data
Our Impact
Our expertise
Core Data Portal
Subscribe to our newsletters
Terms of use
UNESCO Name & Logo
UNESCO FAQ
Report fraud, abuse, misconduct
Scam alert
Policies
Protection of human rights
(Procedure 104)
Access to Information
Website Privacy Notice
Events Privacy Notice
Data Protection and Privacy
Environmental and Social Policies
Follow us
Facebook
Instagram
Twitter
Youtube
Linkedin
Syndication RSS
UNESCO
Culture
World Heritage Centre
The List
World Heritage List
© UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026